In Praise of The AI Value Playbook Unlock the secrets of rapid AI implementation with this indispensable guide by Lisa Weaver-Lambert.
Drawing from expert insights, this essential resource reveals how to harness storytelling and alignment, create an engaging environment for communication, build trust, invest in continual learning, and focus on strategic alignment.
With a writing style thats both concise and compelling, Lisa shows you how to turn AI into a game-changer for your organization not just a buzzword.
Dive in and discover the formula for success.
John Winn, Managing Director at Blackstone I cannot think of another source where so many AI examples are compiled into one book.
I think this is a must read for anyone who wants to learn the history, creation, and, more importantly, ideas of AI to apply to the readers own journey.
As a leader in the technology industry, Ive seen rsthand the transformative potential of AI, but also the critical importance of using it responsibly and securely.
e AI Value Playbook oers a roadmap to maximize its potential.
We can only adapt and change when we listen, and in this book there are many voices across geographies and industries.
I highly recommend it.
Kelly Bissell, Corporate Vice President, Microsoft e AI Value Playbook is valuable for organisational leaders who are seeking to improve productivity by driving value from data and AI.
e AI Playbook oers a powerful guide to help companies master AI concepts, overcome the inevitable obstacles, and learn from real-world examples of applied AI.
Sad Business School, University of Oxford In an era where data is the lifeblood of success, e AI Value Playbook stands out as the essential guide for companies navigating the transition to an AI operating model.
Busy users can leverage chapters for quick reference, while even advanced users will nd it valuable as a source of clear explanations for colleagues and friends.
Lisa unpacks success strategies, weaving insights with captivating case studies that provide executives with actionable mental models.
e book oers a structured approach for initiating, measuring, and adapting AI projects, acknowledging the iterative nature of ROI.
Executives seeking AI-driven growth will nd it a must-read, with practical guidance and a strategic framework for implementation, including the critical development of talent.
It breaks the mold of the typical executive-focused reads.
Its an indispensable ally for business leaders that will leave you inspired and informed.
Bogdan Crivat, Corporate Vice President, Azure Data Analytics, Microsoft At Race Capital, we invest in transformative technologies.
e AI Value Playbook isnt just about technology.
Its about empowering people.
Youll discover how to integrate AI to future-proof your business and empower your workforce.
e AI Value Playbook is your practical guide and roadmap to unlocking the power of AI for your business inspired by real-word case studies.
Alfred Chuang, General Partner at Race Capital, Silicon Valleys most passionate CEO Coach, Co-Founder, CEO, and Chairman of BEA Systems e AI Value Playbook oers a clear-eyed view of how AI is transforming industries.
Lisas actionable framework, combined with real-world case studies, empowers leaders to navigate the complexities of AI integration and release its potential for sustainable growth.
A great read for business leaders looking to develop a strategic roadmap to leverage AI for increased eciency and competitiveness.
Pegah Ebrahimi, Co-Founder and Managing Partner at FPV Ventures In todays rapidly evolving landscape, AI is no longer a future possibility, but a present necessity.
e AI Value Playbook oers a clear roadmap for business leaders to navigate the exciting world of AI and transform it into a strategic advantage for our organizations.
Lisas insights and real-world examples across industries and geographies are invaluable for anyone looking for practical techniques to implement AI and drive positive results.
If youve questioned your companys ability to innovate - or stay relevant - in an era of exponential technological growth, this book is a must-read.
e AI Value Playbook is a roadmap for CEOs to leverage AI to future-proof their organization.
Lisa combines insightful analysis with practical case studies, demonstrating the importance of data management and how AI can drive eciency, accelerate innovation, and unlock new markets.
is book is a critical resource for any organization looking to scale with AI and secure a competitive advantage in the years to come.
e AI Value Playbook equips board members with the knowledge, practical tools, and competitive edge needed to provide the vital leadership required to successfully navigate the transformative potential of AI.
By providing insights from real-world case studies spanning hugely diverse organizations, the book reveals how AI can disrupt and redene industries, driving increased productivity, cost optimization, and long-term growth.
It also tackles the gap between AIs promise and its practical impact, addressing internal organizational barriers.
Most importantly, the book equips boards with a practical framework distilled from practitioners that have the bruises and scars from deploying AI in businesses, guiding board members to ask the right questions of their organizations throughout the AI transformation.
Sanjeevan Bala, Independent Non-executive Director (Bakkavor, SThree) In the fast-paced world of private markets in which I work, staying ahead of the curve is paramount.
e AI Value Playbook oers a clear-eyed view of how AI is transforming industries.
Lisas actionable framework, combined with real-world case studies provides a much needed personal, story-telling approach to a topic thats understandably exciting yet for many, can feel overwhelming to truly understand.
Her deeply humanistic and practical guide empowers business leaders to identify high- potential AI applications.
is book is a valuable guide on the challenges and transformative power of AI that speaks directly to the non-technical business leader.
Alice Murray, Founder, Editor-in-Chief, The Line.
Head of Content and Communications, Alpha Group Lisa is an ex-colleague of mine at Microso and I respect her opinions.
Also, I suspect like a lot of you, I have mixed feelings about the current AI boom: I can see the value in AI but I can also see the vast amount of hype and the obviously ridiculous claims being made.
More than anything I see senior executives talking !
condently about a subject Im sure they dont understand, and " that is clearly a big problem.
is book aims to help solve that # problem by providing a practical guide to AI for non-technical $ leaders, in the form of a series of case studies and interviews % with entrepreneurs and C-level people in the AI space.
is is & a very readable book Lisa has talked to a lot of interesting, ' knowledgeable people and the format makes it a lot more ( palatable for the target audience of your bosss bosss boss than ) your average tech book.
As a technical person who isnt by any 0 means an AI expert I also enjoyed reading it.
1 Chris Webb, Principal Program Manager at Microsoft About the Reviewer !
Tanmaya Gaur " is a Principal Architect at T-Mobile US, Inc.
, with over 15 " years of experience building enterprise systems.
He is a technical expert in the " architecture, development, and deployment of advanced soware and infrastructure " for enhanced user support in telecom applications.
He is passionate about " utilizing composable architecture strategies to aid creation and management " of reusable components across the entire spectrum of web development, from " front-end UX to backend coordination and content management.
His current " focus is building Telecom CRM tools that leverage micro-front-end, articial " intelligence, and machine learning algorithms to boost eciency and improve " the product experience.
xi 0 Contents 1 Introduction 2 .
3 1 4 5 .
6 7 7 Sam Liang, 8 9 .
@ 25 A B , C Founder and CEO at Vectara D .
E 35 F G , H Co-Founder and CEO at Cognigy I .
P 49 Q Miao Song R , S T .
U 65 V Ruben Ortega W , X General Partner at Enjoy the Work Y .
` 73 a Joshua Rubin b , c Principal AI Scientist at Fiddler AI d .
e 83 f Nadine Thomson g , h i .
p 99 q Sarvarth Misra r , s Co-Founder and CEO of ContractPodAi t .
u 109 v w , x AI and Data Science Consultant, Technologist, y and Instructor .
123 Sanjeevan Bala , .
131 Nathalie Gaveau , AI Tech Entrepreneur and Board Member .
145 Phil Harvey , Applied AI Architect .
155 Elizabeth Ajayi , Director, Intelligent Industry at Capgemini Invent .
167 Louis DiCesari , Head of Data, Analytics and AI at Levi Strauss & Co.
173 Vickey Rodrigues , CTO/CDO in Insuretech, Payments, and Healthtech .
181 Sean McDonald , Worldgroup .
189 Julie Gray , !
Head of Data and Internal Systems at Agilio " .
# 199 $ Peter Jackson % , & ' .
( 209 xvi Authors Note @ Writing about AI for non-technical executives and board members requires @ striking a balance between rigor and readability, making sure to be succinct @ without sacricing nuance.
I have drawn on my own experience working A with leadership teams to nd the sweet spot on the continuum, getting the A substance right while keeping the book accessible.
A Opening up my personal access to leading minds in todays business A landscape has given me a unique perspective.
rough our compelling A conversations, I have aimed to bridge the gap between the technical world A of AI and the strategic considerations of leadership.
My interview approach A maintains the authenticity of the dialogue.
I hope you nd that I have A achieved this and these insights inspire you.
1 1 Introduction B Sitting across from an astute CEO I had been working closely with, I could B sense his growing understanding of AIs potential to accelerate the growth of B his business.
His plan to integrate two market-leading businesses was complex B yet also a signicant opportunity.
His questions were increasingly insightful, B delving deeper into his organizations processes and people.
He was envisioning B the future one powered by AI.
B It was a chance to rethink the operating model of his company.
As the weeks B passed, he began networking with other external leaders, who were all harnessing B data as a strategic asset, leveraging it to gain insights, make informed decisions, B and drive growth.
C But, as I witnessed this shi, new questions began to form: How could I scale C this understanding through human stories?
How could these practices and C learnings be applied to other organizations?
is marked the beginning of C e C AI Value Playbook C , a practical guide to AI, aimed at supporting non-technical C executives and board members to quickly formulate a perspective on how to C integrate AI into their businesses.
AI is no longer new, but extracting value C from it remains a challenge for many of us.
2 9 D Today, the expectation D that AI will inevitably create value, foster D innovation, and D secure competitive advantage is prevalent in everyday life.
Our daily interactions D with products and tools from leading technology companies Amazon, Apple, D Facebook, Google, Microso, and Netix create an assumption that AI will D ick a switch and deliver results almost instantly.
D But this is not the reality for most organizations.
e tech giants have been D built from the bottom up with data as their bedrock and with AI integrated D into core processes for nearly a decade.
Technological innovation is intrinsic E to their business models and growth strategies, and they face few of the cash, E storage, or resource challenges common to others.
E However, the transformative potential of AI is not exclusive to these tech E giants.
AI promises to redene businesses, scaling across every sector of our E economy.
eres clear evidence that integrating AI into business operations E measurably enhances eciency while reducing costs.
It is now among the top E ve value drivers on CEO agendas.
E e growing cost of capital, unstable ination, and pressure on operating E expenses are all compounding stresses on organizations today.
erefore, E the ability to manage and control processes underpins growth, regardless of F the sector.
Goldman Sachs research asserts that AI has the potential to boost F annual global GDP by 7% (or almost $7 trillion) over the coming decade F ( F packt.
link/f5sli F ).
erefore, the transformative potential of AI promises to F boost productivity and fuel long-term economic expansion.
F In light of aging populations and other economic growth headwinds, productivity F becomes even more critical.
Without a sustained rise in productivity, economies F will face a growth ceiling that will impact all businesses.
F Sustained productivity growth therefore depends, in part, on how eectively G AI solutions are integrated G across sectors.
However, the speed and scale of G this G integration remain uncertain.
Were at the early stages of this journey.
3 t Where we are G History teaches us that G there are inherent delays with any transformative G technology.
e Solow paradox, coined by economist Robert Solow in 1987, G claimed that while you could see computers everywhere, their inuence was G not then evident in productivity statistics.
is paradox was resolved in the H 1990s when large sectors of the economy, such as retail and wholesale, nally H adopted technologies such as client-server architectures and ERP (enterprise H resource planning) systems.
ese innovations helped revamp business processes, H particularly in supply chain and distribution center eciency, leading to noticeable H gains in productivity.
H Today seems to mirror the patterns of the past.
Despite the fact that AI is H ubiquitous, it hasnt yet translated into signicant productivity growth.
is H discrepancy exists primarily because large sectors of our economy have yet to H integrate AI into their businesses.
While the tech sector is hinging its future H strategies on the continued development and application of AI, many other I sectors are still navigating their path.
I Governments worldwide are turning to AI as a potential engine for both economic I growth and competitive advantage.
Discussions at this level frequently revolve I around innovation, regulation, talent, and specically the systemic barriers I hindering progress.
I As technological advancements have brought down costs, the nancial hurdles I associated with AI adoption have signicantly reduced.
So, as cost and access I are no longer obstacles, the systemic challenge lies in developing AI capabilities I within organizations and strengthening the integration muscle.
is is a process I that demands time and P commitment.
P e crucial question remains whats the optimal way for businesses to develop P and integrate AI?
4 P is book is a practical guide to AI, aimed at supporting non-technical executives P and board members to P quickly formulate a perspective on how to integrate P AI into their businesses.
It includes which levers and processes to consider to P future-proof value.
P e emphasis is on questions that are frequently posed, such as, How can Q businesses adapt to these emerging technologies?
How can they start building Q and deploying AI as a strategic asset to drive eciency?
What risks or threats Q need to be considered?
How quickly can value be created?
Q is book is a response to those demands.
In a series of in-depth and wide- Q ranging conversations with an elite group of practitioners, from CEOs leading Q new generative AI-based companies to data scientists and CFOs working in Q more traditional companies, we hear how they have succeeded in building AI Q solutions in businesses of all sizes across the globe.
Q Our focus has been on how to integrate AI into organizations to drive value.
Q However, as businesses are at varying levels of maturity, the conversations in R this book cover a variety of applications from cutting-edge generative AI to R the essential fundamentals of data management.
" R A diverse scope of interviews and case studies provide honest reections and R insights from their protagonists.
We discover the reasons behind their choices, R the obstacles theyve faced, how theyve persevered, and the lessons learned R from their own set of experiences.
eir thoughts and conclusions deserve R attention and make for inspiring reading.
5 R I have distilled core principles and actionable strategies in a practical playbook.
R Yet, it goes without saying that not every tool or practice is universally eective; S what works for one organization might not be eective for another.
However, S there are consistent principles that can be learned from others, even if the details S will dier within each organization.
e future application of AI technologies S is likely to be an amalgamation of dierent models and practices, with the S deployment of solutions that respond to evolving business circumstances S and needs.
S Just as a map is a description of an environment, but doesnt tell you where to S go, S e AI Value Playbook S provides a roadmap to navigate your route forward T based on the stories of individuals who have made meaningful progress.
T Starting to work with AI doesnt mean immediately overhauling your current T operating model or handing everything over to data scientists.
Instead, it implies T working in alignment with your business objectives and key challenges and T identifying those that could be better solved with AI.
is involves making T business opportunities visible through method, through process, and the work T done in multi-disciplinary skilled teams.
Incorporating AI is fundamentally T about empowering people to do their best work and make the best next decision.
T If you are evaluating how to build AI capabilities to future-proof your company, T this book will provide you with the necessary guidance.
rough insightful U interviews, real-life case studies, and actionable strategies, U e AI Value Playbook U U will help you better organize and harness the value of AI.
T How this book is organized U As a versatile resource, this book can serve as your AI companion, relevant U to wherever you are on your AI journey.
It allows you to access sections or U examples that directly address the specic challenges you face.
6 U Its structured into four distinct sections for easy navigation: Y 1.
` An overview of AI concepts and technology stack provides relevant context a to engage with and learn from for the subsequent conversations and b case studies.
d In-depth conversations with experienced practitioners and leaders across e various sectors, sharing insights on their data and AI journey.
ese dialogues f are designed to be read in any order and oer a broad perspective on the g implementation and challenges of using AI.
Some businesses are mature in h their use, others are just beginning their journey, and many are at various i stages in between.
q Case studies exploring the specics of real-world applications.
ese r present detailed analyses of practical scenarios, oering a closer look at s the application and impact of AI.
u e AI Value Playbook v is the practical framework I have distilled from the w people Ive spoken with and my own professional experience for successful x AI implementation.
7 y 2 Overview of AI Concepts and Technology Stack X To give context to the interviews with leaders and practitioners that follow X in this book, it is important to set a foundational understanding of some of X the fundamental concepts and taxonomy of AI.
However, AI terminology is X challenging today due to its dynamic nature which is resulting in new terms X and redenitions.
erefore, the focus here is on what terms will be benecial X to the reader looking to understand how businesses are using AI to drive X value.
is chapter will help you engage with and learn from the interviews X and case studies.
X is chapter is presented in two key sections: 2.
a AI concepts : is section delves into the core principles that underpin AI and the dierent types of AI, such as machine learning, deep learning, neural networks and generative AI.
It also highlights the strengths and limitations of AI technologies, helping you identify which ones are most relevant to your business needs.
b AI technology stack : is section provides a brief overview of the set of technologies, tools and services used together to build and run an AI application, establishing and ensuring trustworthy AI Systems and AI as a Service (AIaaS).
a AI Concepts ` e term articial intelligence has ` been used in computer science since the 1950s, ` with the Dartmouth conference in 1956 usually cited as its ocial birthplace.
` Since then, the eld of AI has been through a series of cycles of strong support a and investment versus periods of criticism and reduction of investment, referred a to as AI winters.
ese cycles throughout the 70s, 80s, and 90s had a material a impact on consistent progress.
a is situation fundamentally changed with the advent of big data and cloud a computing.
e aordability and power of data storage and CPU time increased a signicantly, making it possible to train models more eectively.
As a result, AI a models that were once theoretical and unattainable due to resource constraints a became practical and ecient.
a In the last ve years, the largest technology organizations in the world have a tackled and started to solve problems that were completely intractable only b ten years before.
We are at the start of a period of high investment and rapid b progress that is bringing new enthusiasm among a larger population.
However, b the outcome of this period remains uncertain.
b AI is a broad denition for a range of soware applications.
As a branch of b computer science, AI can be thought of as a smart computer that can do tasks b usually done by people.
It understands languages, recognizes patterns, solves b problems, makes decisions, and learns from experience.
It uses vast amounts b of data and follows instructions called algorithms to automate tasks.
b Comparing AI to traditional soware applications, for instance, if we want b soware to detect dogs in a picture, writing conventional soware becomes c complex and costly.
AI is more suitable for this task.
e process involves feeding c an AI system with thousands of pictures, some containing dogs and others c not.
e AI learns from these examples and develops an internal conguration c that can detect if a random image contains a dog.
is example illustrates how c AI is suitable for solving complex tasks that are near impossible to tackle with 9 c traditional soware.
is is a fundamental shi from traditional programming c which is designed to produce deterministic c results based on a set of inputs, as c AI learns from the data and makes predictions or decisions without having c to be explicitly programmed to perform the task.
@ Types of AI d At a high level, AI can be d categorized into two main types: narrow AI and d general AI.
D E F Narrow AI, also known as weak AI, is designed to perform a specic task, such G as voice recognition or image analysis.
ese solutions operate under a limited H set of constraints within a limited context and are only intelligent within I their specic domain.
Examples are frequently found in nance, for example, P scaling commercial contract reviews, augmenting collection prioritization, Q forecasting, streamlining invoice approvals, and anomaly detection.
e R examples given in the interviews in this book provide numerous use case S demonstrations of Narrow AI.
T U V General AI, also known as strong AI and Articial General Intelligence W (AGI), refers to systems that possess the ability to perform any intellectual X task that a human can do.
ey can understand, learn, adapt, and implement Y knowledge in dierent domains.
While this type of AI is not currently available, ` prominent AI researchers forecast that the rst AGI will be developed within a the next decade.
Nevertheless, it is the core of many philosophical debates b as while the advancement of AI may be inevitable, its ultimate destination c is not clear.
AIs function is complex and uncertain.
Some Large Language d Models (LLMs) have demonstrated advanced capabilities beyond narrow AI; e however, there are still substantial dierences between f these AI systems and g human cognitive systems.
10 f AI encompasses various interconnected areas: i p q Machine Learning (ML) is a subset r of AI.
It is the foundation that includes the s algorithms and statistical models that underpin AI.
It refers to the approaches t associated with getting computers to learn and act like humans, improving u their learning over time in an autonomous fashion, by feeding them data and v information in the form of observations and real-world interactions.
w x y Neural Networks (NNs) are a subset of machine learning, modeled aer the human brains architecture and designed to emulate its processing style.
ese networks consist of interconnected nodes, analogous to the brains neurons, organized in layers.
Data enters through the input layer, is processed through one or several layers where computation and transformation occur, and culminates in an output layer that delivers the nal results.
Each layers nodes are linked with weights numerical parameters that are adjusted during training enabling the network to discern complex patterns and learn from data.
Deep Learning (DL) is an advanced subset of NNs characterized by its use of several hidden layers that add complexity and the ability to perform complex tasks.
Deep learning approaches excel at processing and learning from extensive datasets and are instrumental in fueling many of the latest innovations in AI.
ese include generative AI models, computer vision, and self-driving soware.
e advantage here is the ability to handle and learn from very large datasets, allowing it to recognize complex patterns and make intelligent decisions.
e drawback is the almost complete absence of explainability.
For example, it does not explain why a dog is not recognized in a certain picture when there clearly is a dog present, or why the AI has denied credit to a specic person.
Generative AI (GenAI) is a subset of deep learning that generates multi-modal content such as text, videos, and images with user interactions.
It is trained on vast datasets to detect patterns and creates outputs without instruction.
Unlike databases, these models dont query and return 100% accurate historical information.
Instead, they mimic inputs and provide new content that is likely to be correct based on probabilistic techniques.
11 AI training techniques q Training a custom q model frequently involves the use of multiple techniques, q as shown in the following diagram.
q Figure 2.
1 A variety of AI training techniques r Some common techniques include: !
" # Supervised Learning, a traditional $ approach in machine learning where a % model is trained on a labeled dataset.
In this context, labeled means that & the dataset contains the answers to the questions we want the model to be ' able to answer.
( For example, if we want to train an ML model to predict customer churn, ) we can feed the model with historical data about our customers, including 0 age, gender, geographical location, purchasing behavior, and product usage.
1 Crucially, we augment this dataset with the churn data for each customer.
2 Churn, in this context, refers to when a customer stops using a product or 3 service.
Once trained, the model will be able to forecast the date when a 4 particular customer is likely to churn based on the available data for that 5 unique customer.
s 12 7 8 9 Reinforcement Learning (RL) addresses @ a key limitation of supervised and A unsupervised learning: their inability to discover novel mechanisms beyond the B relationships in the data.
Reinforcement Learning algorithms such as deep-Q C learning, or actor-critic, enhance eectiveness by allowing the exploration of D strategies not represented in the available data.
is approach is akin to A/B E testing F on steroids, where millions of dierent scenarios are automatically G generated, and the feedback loop is integral to the learning process.
H For example, the machine might experiment with varying discount levels to I identify the most eective discount at each stage of the customer journey.
P e RL system might issue random discounts to thousands of customers Q and then measure the churn rate.
is process renes the discount strategy R to optimal levels based on the knowledge of what works or not for specic S customer groups.
For example, the system might learn that customers with T children value a free month in August, while auent customers in rural U areas respond well to bundle discounts.
In this way, reinforcement learning V enables the discovery of eective, tailored strategies that were not initially W apparent in the data.
X Y ` Unsupervised Learning refers to an a ML approach where models are trained b on unlabeled data.
Unlike supervised learning, where we have explicit labels c for our data, unsupervised learning involves discovering underlying structures d without predened categories.
In this scenario, there arent specic targets to e predict, but we aim to uncover meaningful patterns, similarities, or f clusters g in the data.
h For example, by feeding customer data into the ML solution, we might discover i that customers without children exhibit similar behavior across dierent p geographical locations and income levels.
Armed with this insight, specic q marketing r campaigns can be developed to target this particular customer s segment eectively.
13 t AIs limitations w e current limitations of w AI systems include hallucinations, bias, w explainability, and scalability: x y Hallucinations: AI hallucinations refer to inaccurate or misleading results generated by AI models.
ese errors can arise due to various factors, including limited training data, faulty assumptions made by the model, or biases present in the training data.
Bias: AI systems are trained on large datasets, which are created by humans.
Consequently, these systems can inadvertently learn and perpetuate the biases present in the training data.
Common biases include: Cognitive biases: Unconscious errors in human judgment that can inuence AI training and outcomes.
Implicit bias: Unconscious stereotypes that can be reected in AI if present in training data.
Gender, racial, and age bias: AI decisions can unfairly disadvantage people based on these factors.
Sampling bias: Occurs when training data isnt representative of the population.
Temporal bias: Occurs when training data is time-specic and may not reect current or future states.
Over-tting to training data: Occurs when AI performs well on training data but poorly on new data.
is happens when a model captures external factors (noise) that alter the data points but are not part of the system that we want to model along with the underlying pattern in the training data, resulting in poor performance on new data.
Algorithmic bias: Prejudiced assumptions made during algorithm development can lead to biased outcomes.
" Explainability: AI models, including LLMs, are oen referred to as black # boxes because its challenging to understand how they arrive at a particular $ output.
is lack of transparency applies in particular to neural networks % and deep learning systems whereas simple ML algorithms like decision trees & allow an external user to understand how the AI came to a specic result.
' ( ) Scalability: AI systems that perform at scale in production settings can become 0 very expensive and very hard to maintain for a number of related reasons: 1 2 3 Data sourcing and ingesting: In general, large AI models perform better 4 when more good quality data is used to train them.
Large, good quality 5 datasets are dicult and expensive to handle and store.
6 7 8 Compute cost to train: Most deep learning systems, and LLMs in particular, 9 require vast amounts of compute power to train, with periodic retraining @ to maintain acceptable performances or to add more recent data.
A B C Compute cost to D operate: Running a model that serves many concurrent E users can become complex and expensive in exponential ways.
F Copyright and AI A complex, critical issue linked to current limitations of AI is that of copyright infringement.
As I write this book, in 2024, it is still unclear how the issues of consent, credit, and compensation can be addressed and resolved.
Most authors argue that before an LLM is trained using their original work, they should be consulted to give permission.
en, when their work contributes to an LLM output, they should be credited and compensated.
Most AI companies argue that its impossible to correctly attribute credit since LLMs are not explainable and its impossible to determine what data source is used to generate arbitrary output.
ey also argue that LLMs and generative AI in general are not dissimilar to artists who draw inspiration and build on the work of those before them.
Its dicult to predict where the copyright law is going to settle, but recently large publishing companies and AI organizations have signed contracts to regulate the usage of copyright-protected material.
It 15 seems likely that more of those deals will be struck to try and create a viable business model.
e issue of copyright is gaining momentum.
However, there are conicting and contradictory regulations across dierent regions.
As an area of ongoing change and development, business leaders are advised to refer to the latest regulations in the regions where their organizations operate.
h Trustworthy AI Trustworthy AI is also an emerging eld originating from collaborative international eorts, privacy-enhancing technologies, and ethical principles, aimed at reliable, transparent, and privacy-respecting AI systems.
It has become an integral part of the AI system lifecycle to ensure benecial and reliable outcomes.
It requires governance and regulatory compliance, from ideation to design, development, deployment, and machine learning operations.
v Generative AI and LLMs in more detail LLMs, a subset of generative AI, are good at summarizing context and language, which is particularly eective in text-based writing assistance, content creation, and reasoning over structured and unstructured data.
Companies are applying LLMs across dierent sectors to enhance their operations and we have in-depth case studies where we discuss these applications.
e common emerging applications for generative AI include in operations, enabling a new type of customer engagement and care, empowering advisors and market researchers, building co-pilots to help customers nd knowledge faster, improving marketing eectiveness, and accelerating product development.
Foundational components of LLMs Tokens and vectors, embeddings, and transformers are all interconnected concepts and play crucial roles in processing and understanding natural language data.
ey help LLMs to grasp the intricacies of human language 16 and perform a wide range of Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks.
Heres a brief explanation of each.
Tokens and Vectors In the rst stage of the process of understanding human language, the text data is broken down into smaller units called tokens, which can be words, parts of words, or punctuation marks.
ese tokens are then transformed into vectors, which are numerical representations of these words.
is transformation process allows the model to understand the meaning of words and how they relate to each other.
Embeddings e vectors created from tokens are also known as embeddings, which make text, images, and audio digestible for AI transformers.
Embeddings are numerical vectors that represent, in a machine-readable format, the semantic context of a text (for chatbots) in a format that is language-independent and designed to retain as much knowledge as possible.
For example, the machine will be able to parse the token Florence as a city (the Italian city in Tuscany) or a rst name (as in Florence Nightingale).
is allows the machine to retain the implied knowledge that in a specic text might be describing the architecture of a city as opposed to the founder of modern nursing.
A key feature of embeddings is that similar concepts have similar values.
is feature enables search, comparison, and manipulation beyond simple full-text queries, thereby enhancing the capabilities of AI systems.
Transformers e transformer is the core engine of LLMs.
Its primary function is to convert an input embedding into an output embedding, which is then translated into human language.
e transformer leverages all its training to determine the most probable output given the users input.
It generates its output by selecting the most likely token at each step.
is process allows the transformer to produce 17 coherent and contextually appropriate responses.
Its a key component in the eectiveness of LLMs in understanding and generating human-like text.
The evolution and impact of transformers in AI In 2017, a paper titled Attention Is All You Need was published by Google and introduced the concept of transformers.
is kick-started an entirely new era of AI.
Transformers now form the backbone of many cutting-edge AI applications enabling the scaling of LLMs like those that power ChatGPT and Gemini.
While LLMs focus primarily on language, generative AI models can serve other purposes, transforming data between multiple modalities, including text, images, video, and audio.
Regardless of the purpose, each model interprets the underlying meaning of its input and generates the most likely output according to the training data.
e real power of LLMs comes from the fact that they work in areas far beyond language.
e latest release of AI solutions is multimodal, meaning that they can use a text prompt to generate an image or video.
Examples of multimodal systems include: H I P DALL-E, an OpenAI Q system that can create images from text descriptions, R using a large neural network trained on a dataset of text-image pairs.
S T U Midjourney, a generative articial intelligence program and service that can V create images from text descriptions (prompts).
W X Y Stable Diusion AI, an open-source AI model that can generate realistic ` images from text descriptions or other inputs.
It uses a technique called latent a diusion, which involves the iterative addition of noise random variations b or distortions to an image until it matches the desired output.
c d e SORA OpenAI system generates videos from text prompts, due for launch f in 2024.
18 e current LLMs available on the market, like GPT, are pre-trained on a diverse range of internet text and can be used by many users at the same time.
However, they are not designed to learn or adapt to new information aer training.
is means that while they can generate creative text based on the input provided, they cant be ne-tuned on a specic task without going through a re-training process.
For instance, if you have a specic set of documents on a specialized topic and want to teach an LLM to understand and generate text about this topic, you cannot do this with models like ChatGPT.
Instead, you would need to take a general-purpose LLM and train it on your specic dataset.
is process, known as ne-tuning, adapts the model to your specic needs.
However, ne-tuning a model is technologically complex and expensive.
e investment is typically justied by the potential return or by addressing concerns such as security and privacy that require the model to have a deep understanding of a particular domain.
A practical example of a ne-tuned LLM is a chatbot trained on the FAQ of a large enterprise.
is chatbot can answer specic questions about the companys products or processes, providing valuable assistance to both customers and employees.
Grounded Generation/Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) Grounded Generation, or Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG), is a secure, cost-eective alternative to ne-tuning in LLMs.
It reduces hallucination levels and uses semantic retrieval techniques for context provision.
It can provide citations, enhancing the credibility of its outputs.
RAG is adept at extracting, encoding, and indexing intelligence from various sources, which is then retrieved and ranked per user queries.
It generates relevant content by considering unique contexts and historical materials.
e choice between Grounded Generation and ne-tuning depends on the task requirements.
Some projects may benet from a combination of RAG and ne-tuning, enhancing model performance and reliability.
is trade-o is explained in depth in the Vectara case study ( Chapter 26 ).
19 The commercial opportunities of the democratization of LLMs Moving forward, as demonstrated by the companies in this book, the expectation is that businesses will take a novel approach to solving new problems previously labeled unsolvable.
Today, there are many people who until now didnt have access to this capability nor come from AI research domains, but who now have access and can bring their creativity to solving new problems.
Multiple companies are competing to establish and develop environments that can eectively work with open-source AI models, including GPT, Claude, Gemini, and Llama among others.
is open-source nature is leading to diverse and innovative applications of these models, as individuals and organizations take them in unique and interesting directions, as we will see in the following interviews and case studies.
e pace of development in this area is likely to be rapid, with companies striving to create use cases that oer some form of dierentiation.
is competitive landscape is expected to drive investment, innovation, and progress in the eld.
How controlled your industry domain is will heavily inuence how applicable the models will be.
In areas of very high regulation, such as in nance and !
healthcare, where being correct " versus close enough is most important, these # models are less applicable without considerable investment in customization.
b AI Technology Stack % An AI technology & structure, oen referred to as the stack, is a set of tools and ' technologies that are used to develop, deploy, and manage AI applications.
It ( consists of dierent layers that perform various functions such as data collection, ) data processing, machine learning, model training, model deployment, and 0 user interface.
An AI tech stack can vary depending on the type and complexity 1 of the AI project.
20 2 To understand the components of the tech stack, lets use an example of an 3 infrastructure investment rm wanting to forecast the value of their assets at 4 exit.
To accomplish this, the rm will need the following: Data sources: Both internal (for example, asset depreciation history) and external (for example, macroeconomic factors, demographic data) sources to provide the necessary data.
Data pipeline layer: Automated processes to ingest data from various sources and store it consistently in a central data store.
Data storage: A system to eciently store and potentially transform the data to meet enterprise needs.
Data quality: Ensure datasets are of good enough quality to properly train the AI model.
AI algorithm: Use the data from the storage to train a forecasting model to predict asset value at exit.
Past asset valuations and market conditions contribute to the training of the algorithm.
AI platform: Provide a toolset to eciently build, test, and deploy AI algorithms in an enterprise, shared environment.
e toolset includes Integrated Development Environments (IDEs), code editors, debuggers, testing tools, version control systems, and documentation tools.
APIs (application programming interface): Forecast data is accessible programmatically through an internal system.
APIs allow authorized third- party systems to access the data in a controlled and monitored way.
AI solution: A fully integrated solution that allows business users to explore and analyze forecasted asset valuations as well as what if scenarios to anticipate various outcomes.
It oen includes a web-based interface for interaction and a dashboard for standardized reporting.
21 Data as a universal resource v Without data, there w is no AI.
e emerging imperative for businesses is to not x only adopt AI models but to also establish robust data management practices.
y Historically, some companies may have managed without a proper data architecture, but to leverage AI eectively, a solid foundation is essential.
Despite the buzz around AI and machine-learning techniques, their applications are still maturing, with the majority of eort and time being spent on the data foundations which are needed to enable data usage.
We will encounter this challenge in honest interviews with practitioners, particularly in more established companies.
Many companies seldom question the value of their data.
However, when companies invest in structuring their data and using it eectively, there is a signicant shi.
Proper data management can streamline operations, improve decision-making, and ultimately drive growth.
Data comes in many forms, all of which are valuable for AI systems.
e following are examples of data types that oen serve initial use cases: Transactional data includes data about sales, purchases, and other customer transactions.
Its oen used for forecasting and personalization.
Financial data includes sales gures, revenue, costs, and other nancial metrics.
Its oen used for forecasting and nancial planning.
Customer data includes demographic information, purchase history, and other information about customer interactions.
Its oen used for personalization and churn prediction.
Customer support data is generated from customer interactions with support services, including call logs, emails, and chat transcripts.
Its used to improve customer service, identify common issues, and enhance product/service quality.
22 Operational data includes data about business operations such as supply chain data, inventory data, and other operational metrics such as inventory, suppliers, manufacturing process and eciency, shipments (timelines and costs), procurement and compliance.
Its oen used for recasting and optimization.
Web analytics include data about website usage, such as page views, click- through rates, and time spent on site.
Its oen used for personalization and understanding customer behavior.
In addition to the " typical data inputs, several other types of data are widely # used to support various use cases such as personalizing customer journeys, B2B $ acquisition, understanding customer sentiment to inform marketing strategies, % optimizing supply chains, and new product development.
ese include: Sociodemographic data, which includes information about individuals like age, gender, and education.
Its essential for market research, customer segmentation, and tailoring products/services to specic demographic groups.
User journey data, which is generated by tracking the path customers take through a digital channel (website, application, chatbot or conversational interface).
It includes data points like page views, clicks, page browsing times, questions asked, sentiment (answer was useful versus not), basket adds, and purchases.
Firmographic data relates to organizational characteristics and typically includes specics such as industry classication, company size gauged by revenue and employees, geographical locations, investment proles, fundraising history, credit ratings, and so on.
Its used for market segmentation, targeted marketing, and competitive analyses.
Social media data, which includes user-generated content on B2B and B2C social media platforms, including posts, likes, shares, comments, and engagement with content.
23 Product telemetry data, which is collected from products or devices, providing insights into usage patterns, performance issues, and user interactions.
is data is typically used for product development, quality assurance, and customer experience improvement.
Data readiness X Data needs to be prepared Y or pre-processed to be suitable for the specic AI ` model.
Data readiness refers to the extent to which a businesss data is prepared, a available, and suitable for use in AI applications.
However, achieving data b readiness is oen challenging due to data assets scattered across dierent c departments and systems, poor quality, lack of standardization, and accessibility d as well as gaps in processes for compliance and security measures.
e Lack of data readiness is oen the primary factor contributing to delays or f abandonment of AI initiatives.
erefore, ensuring data readiness is crucial g for successful AI implementation.
AI as a Service (AIaaS) i Building and then p maintaining AI solutions can be costly and time-consuming q to satisfy compliance standards and regulations.
AIaaS enables customers to r access and use cloud-based AI capabilities without having to invest in the s hardware or soware needed to develop and deploy AI applications.
It provides t scalability, allowing clients to adjust their resources according to their needs u without worrying about infrastructural limitations.
AIaaS ensures exibility as v customers arent required to have expertise in AI or machine learning and can w select from an array of pre-built or tailored solutions.
Furthermore, it enables x access to the latest technologies y and best practices in the eld.
25 3 Sam Liang We want to build a large spoken language model that can generate realistic conversations.
Eventually the OtterPilot will have a really natural conversation with one person, or even with multiple people, and really understand the dynamics at play.
In a few years, its conceivable that OtterPilot will actively participate in meetings Quite fascinating, isnt it?
LinkedIn: samliang SAM LIANG 26 Sam Liang , CEO of Otter.
ai, followed his initial studies in computer science with a PhD at Stanford University in computer-distributed systems.
Instrumental in the development of the Google Maps location platform, Sam engineered the back-end system that powers Google Mobile Maps, used by billions of users worldwide.
In 2010, he ventured into the world of entrepreneurship, dedicating his time and knowledge to building startups.
His innovative next venture in Palo Alto, Silicon Valley, initially focused on the development of a mobile analytics system.
is caught the attention of Alibaba, leading to an acquisition in 2016.
In that same year, undeterred by the fact that conversational AI was in a nascent form, he launched Otter.
ai a speech recognition system that is now a transcription service used worldwide.
LISA : How does your AI-powered system enhance business collaboration?
SAM : Our AI has high accuracy and speed, operating in real time, recording and processing information as it happens.
e end product is live-streamed, providing users with immediate access to the data.
e AIs output appears on your computer almost instantly.
But thats not all.
In the background, its also comprehending the context and understanding the nuances of the conversation.
Meanwhile, our AI is also generating a real-time summary.
We have been working with AI for seven years now.
During this time, weve been diligently building an AI-powered collaboration system for enterprises.
Working in a large enterprise requires you to spend a ton of time in meetings people forget how much time they are talking and listening on a daily basis.
So, a tremendous amount of investment, both in terms of time and resources, !
is allocated to meetings.
Were trying to disrupt the current system, to optimize " meetings, and reduce unnecessary ones.
Using Otter, many large meetings can # be bypassed as it swily provides a content summary, eliminating the need $ to sit through 60-minute meetings.
is is a whole new world.
Were really % excited & about ChatGPT and ' other large language models and were ( building ) our own AI to 0 enhance the value of conversations.
SAM LIANG 27 1 LISA 2 : What was the motive behind the origin of Otter.
Could you share the 3 story behind its inception?
4 SAM 5 : ere were 6 two motivations.
e rst 7 is my deep interest in data as a 8 computer 9 scientist.
ink about the fact that humans have been around for @ about 100,000 years, and for most of that time, weve communicated verbally.
A But no voice data was saved, so thats a huge loss of human knowledge and B intelligence.
It was only aer omas Edison invented the audio recorder that C we began to capture voice, but even then, 99.
9% of human conversation is never D recorded.
So, I realized that theres a big loss of knowledge there.
E On a practical level, as a startup founder working with businesses and having F to go to so many meetings, I found it hard to remember who said what or G even recall what I had promised others, and this was back in 2016.
I found it H frustrating that I could use Gmail to search for anything from 20 years ago, I but I couldnt search for something I had heard just three hours ago.
is led P me to think, why not build a product application that enables this?
Q So, I had two motivations.
One was about wanting to collect as much voice R data as possible.
e second is the practical need to help people remember the S information they discussed and help teams share the information relevant to T a broader audience outside the meeting.
So, how U do we share this information V eectively?
We wanted to solve that problem.
W LISA X : What are you focused on now to build out the services?
Y SAM ` : Were building a a horizontal product to help people with their meetings b across dierent domains.
is includes investment meetings, board meetings, c internal team meetings, and even customer support or sales meetings.
d Weve recently launched a new product e called OtterPilot for Sales.
Its a vertical f solution built on top of our horizontal platform.
is solution oers specic g features tailored to the sales use case, for when a sales rep speaks to the customer.
SAM LIANG 28 h In a typical sales interaction, the sales rep needs to listen very carefully to the i customers requirements and pain points, the competitors theyre considering, p their budget, and pricing requirements.
Traditionally, the sales rep would q need to carefully take notes and then, aer the meeting, manually enter this r information into a CRM system.
Now, with AI OtterPilot for Sales, we completely s automate this process because AI can listen, with the participants permission, t transcribe and save everything, and then identify the important insights that u need to be saved into the CRM.
e AI extracts this information and instantly v enters it into the CRM, saving the sales rep valuable time.
w e AI provides transparency.
e sales call information is available to the x sales manager as well.
e sales managers job is to monitor how all the sales y calls go and to keep coaching the sales rep.
Traditionally, the sales managers actually dont have visibility on how all the sales calls go but with Otter, they can access every call, all the recordings, transcripts, summaries, and even get a score for the call.
is automation and insight generation can really help both junior sales reps and sales managers, potentially uncovering insights they might have missed.
LISA : Can you bring this to life with a customer case study?
SAM : Certainly.
We worked with a US-based IT automation services company facing productivity challenges due to the cumbersome process of manual note taking during sales calls.
Otter helped them to: ) ) ) Streamline the note-taking process to allow reps to focus on ) customer interactions.
) ) ) Automatically record, transcribe, and store meeting notes to ) improve eciency.
0 0 0 Easily tag and assign action items to participants to increase collaboration 0 and move deals quickly.
SAM LIANG 29 e impact was signicant: Otter greatly improved workow, saving the sales team approximately one-third of their time and increasing productivity.
Another use case was the work we did with a global nancial media company to address various challenges, including those arising from the increase in remote work and the need to ensure inclusivity within their workforce.
e media company decided Otter was the best company-wide solution for its tens of thousands of employees due to its: 1 1 1 Speed and accuracy over other AI-powered transcription tools.
1 1 1 Searchability feature, which allows media journalists to easily nd what 1 theyre looking for.
1 1 2 Ability to save time in meetings, give journalists condence in their notes, 2 and provide accountability.
2 2 2 Potential to foster a more inclusive workplace, as Otter oers employees with 2 disabilities new options for accessing their work and communicating in the 2 workplace.
For 2 instance, Otter oers employees with hearing impairments 2 an essential solution.
) LISA 0 : Could you elaborate on the technology stack behind Otter?
1 SAM 2 : Our technology 3 is designed to understand 4 and transcribe conversations 5 with high accuracy and speed in real time.
Most of the products you see today 6 dont provide live transcripts, or handle accents, names, terminologies, or medical 7 terms 8 if youre in the healthcare domain.
ese are all challenging and a lot of 9 hard work for AI to do.
Weve also developed technology to understand the @ voice print of each person and identify whos talking.
Its natural for humans, A but challenging for machines, to separate one persons voice from another.
SAM LIANG 30 B e raw transcript could have thousands of words from one meeting, so to C make it more consumable we summarize and condense the information into D a few bullet points and identify the key topics.
You can then search for topics E and nd a few bullet points for each one.
F Moving forward, were building a large spoken language model, which is dierent G from the models built H by OpenAI and others.
Our focus is on training with I conversational data, as spoken language and human conversations have dierent P characteristics compared to written documents.
Q e most prominent dierences involve multiple speakers who, as they take R turns, will each speak with specic intonation and emotion.
is dynamic is S special to conversations and diers from written documents, which are usually T formal and have a well-designed structure.
Conversations, on the other hand, U are free-owing and unstructured, and the presence of multiple speakers makes V things even more complicated.
W e next step is to actually generate conversations.
We want to build a large X spoken language model that can generate realistic conversations.
Eventually Y the OtterPilot can have a really natural conversation with one person, or even ` with multiple people, and really understand the dynamics at play.
In a few a years, its conceivable that OtterPilot will actively participate in meetings, b using advanced AI analysis to identify key topics, actions, decisions c made, d and e discussion sentiment.
Additionally, it could provide multilingual support.
f Quite fascinating, isnt it?
g LISA h : Is OtterPilot being developed only in English or in multiple languages?
i SAM p : At present, we q are r focusing solely on English.
However, we have plans s to extend our reach to all other major languages in the future.
SAM LIANG 31 t LISA u : How does Otters service dier from other team collaboration platforms, v particularly in terms of transcription features?
w SAM x : Microso Teams y oer transcription services, and has recently announced a co-pilot, so there is some overlap, but our high-level vision is dierent.
Microso Teams has been around for a while, starting as a video conferencing system with added messaging capabilities.
But when it comes to the voice component, even though they provide transcripts, our goal is dierent.
We aim to build a system that provides transparency for the entire organization.
e sharing model is really important.
Our philosophy is that at most meetings, competencies should be open and transparent, regardless of whether youre part of the sales, marketing, engineering, or design team.
We estimate that about 90% of meetings should be public, to facilitate information sharing and ow, and to reduce information silos, which oen lead to ineciencies within companies.
Even within our own company, we see that sometimes one person discusses the same topic with three dierent groups of people.
To reduce this ineciency, perhaps it would be more eective to have the discussion once and then share that with the other two groups.
Were in the process of building a collaborative AI-powered system, and meeting transcription is just one small part of it.
As we grow and evolve, others may start to emulate us, just as they did with the business messaging app, Slack.
While Microso certainly controls a signicant portion of the market, you always see startups disrupting larger players.
Zoom is a prime example.
Even just ve years ago, it was hard to imagine Zoom capturing such a large market share, especially considering that Microso Teams, Google Hangouts, and Webex had been around for quite some time.
SAM LIANG 32 LISA : How would you characterize your customers?
SAM : Our customer base is relatively horizontal, composed mainly of knowledge workers.
We operate with a PLG (Product-Led Growth) approach, which means most people sign up independently.
LISA : Given the broad application of your product, are there specic knowledge professionals across various industries and company sizes that particularly benet from it?
SAM : Our user base is pretty diverse.
I will say weve !
seen knowledge workers " from all kinds of industries using Otter they could be salespeople, consultants, # writers, and more.
We have a mobile app, which is a key part of our strategy $ and oers a dierent experience from Microso Teams or Zoom.
Users can % record their thoughts while walking in the park or even driving.
Writers oen & use Otter to capture their thoughts.
en, Otters edit mode allows users to ' correct errors and adjust line breaks for cleaner transcriptions.
Finally, they ( can copy and paste the text into the articles theyre writing.
So, we see a wide ) range of use cases.
0 LISA 1 : How have you addressed concerns about security, particularly given that 2 your product is used in peoples meetings?
3 SAM 4 : Suspicion or fear 5 is understandable.
e 6 idea of being recorded is a new 7 thing.
In the past, it usually indicated something bad, like being in a police 8 station.
Youre talking to the police and they might record you.
Times are 9 changing, and our perceptions need to adapt.
Its a balancing act.
@ ink about it do you want AI to assist you in remembering details and A sharing information with your team?
AI can be a great help, but it needs data B to work with.
Of course, this means you have to keep it condential and secure.
C ere is no question about the security model.
We didnt invent anything new D this is pretty standard across the industry in terms of cloud-based services E Microso Teams, for instance, does the same thing.
If you record a meeting SAM LIANG 33 F or generate a transcript, its stored in the cloud.
Zoom operates on the same G principle.
Even when you use Gmail, your emails, condential as they may be, H are stored in someone elses cloud system.
I Otter is similar.
Were no dierent from those other services.
Of course, we P need to overcome some conventional nervousness to use such a new tool, but Q things will change.
E Key Takeaways E E E Strategic advantages of LLMs E : Investing in LLMs can lead to innovative E solutions that improve E business operations, including augmenting tasks and E generating new perspectives.
ose rms that have been investing in AI for F multiple years have a head start with generative AI.
It requires time to build F muscle and incorporate AI into work processes.
F F F F : AIs high speed and accuracy F provide F improved eciency and transparency by recording and processing F information as it happens, as well as generating key insights.
Using advanced F AI analysis, these solutions are moving toward more active participation in G meetings and creative collaborations.
For example, pioneering artist will.
am G is actively experimenting with a new AI cohost for his podcast.
G G G G : As companies scale, particularly G those that employ a signicant number of knowledge workers, ineciencies G tend to increase due to the proliferation of time-consuming meetings and G information silos.
LLMs, particularly AI-powered transcription and audio G tools, can play a crucial role in addressing this issue.
H H H AI solutions for enhanced inclusivity H : AI solutions have proven to signicantly H broaden accessibility for employees with disabilities.
ey oer new opportunities H for eective communication and work access, which can foster a more inclusive H work environment.
SAM LIANG 34 H H H Product-Led Growth (PLG) strategy I : is relies on the product as the primary I way I to acquire, engage, and retain customers.
Product adoption scales through I user experience rather than a sales force.
e strategy encourages individuals I to sign up independently, fostering organic growth by word of mouth and I referrals.
It highlights the importance of an intuitive product that can be used I without extensive guidance or training.
is approach is instrumental to the I I product development of AI solutions that require high user engagement and I data-driven iteration to evolve the product.
35 P 4 P A A mr A A wadallah P Founder and CEO at Vectara Generative AI is transformative because, for the rst time in history, we have AI systems that can interpret human language as we do, which is unprecedented.
Minimizing hallucination, bias, and copyright abuse are key issues that anybody thinking about deploying this technology cares about.
Q LinkedIn: Q awadallah A A MR A A WADA ll LL AH 36 Amr Awadallah is the Founder and CEO of Vectara, a generative AI platform that oers a complete, modular, and API-based search pipeline for developers.
Originally from Egypt, Amr moved to the US in 1995 to pursue a PhD at Stanford University aer which he launched his rst startup which Yahoo acquired.
Following an eight-year tenure at Yahoo, Amr launched Cloudera, a pioneering big data company that went public in 2017 and was subsequently acquired by a private equity rm.
Amr subsequently served as Vice President !
of Developer Relations at Google Cloud for two years before starting Vectara, a " venture dedicated to building tools that enable enterprises to leverage generative # AI technologies, using their own data.
$ LISA % : What is Vectaras core product and how does it enhance the capabilities & of generative AI technologies for business?
' AMR ( : Vectara is a pioneering ) AI platform that 0 empowers organizations to 1 harness the power of generative AI using their proprietary data to innovate and 2 scale.
is integration ensures that interactions with the large language model 3 (LLM) are uniquely tailored, providing responses that reect the companys own 4 information and context.
In addition, Vectara addresses common challenges 5 associated with AI models, such as reducing hallucinations the generation 6 of inaccurate or nonsensical information mitigating bias and preventing 7 copywriting violations.
is focused approach makes Vectara an invaluable tool 8 for companies looking to leverage AI while maintaining accuracy, relevance 9 and legal compliance.
@ LISA A : How has the soware industry been driven by eciency and cost reduction, B and how have historical applications of AI contributed to this advancement?
C AMR D : Soware is all E about eciency, whether thats in our business and our F processes, our nances, or our marketing.
How can we do it with less cost and G with better performance, meaning less human error?
A A MR A A WADA ll LL AH 37 H e AI evolution that I were going through right now generative AI is a subset P of the bigger AI evolution that has been going on for some time.
In the previous Q AI wave, there were three primary subsets.
e rst was pattern recognition AI R applications, which have been pivotal in detecting fraud, identifying quality S issues in products or pipelines, and diagnosing diseases.
Pattern-based AI is T a facet of machine learning that focuses on identifying previous patterns and U regularities in data that indicate for example, this type of disease or this type V of failure or this type of fraud, and then we just want to nd it again at scale.
W e second subset was clustering algorithms that tailor user experiences for X more eective marketing - the personalization example.
Can we cluster the Y behaviors of groups of products, groups of users, and so on?
And can we ` either upsell them, cross-sell them, or market to them in the right way with a the right message?
b e third subset was forecasting future scenarios through time series analysis.
c For instance, given the history of this sensor on this boiler, can I predict the d next time this boiler is going to fail?
Or, given this stock, the high-frequency e trading stock price, how its moving and the signals I have, can I predict what f that is going to look like in the next few minutes?
ese were the primary three g subsets in the previous AI wave.
h LISA i : How is generative AI dierent from the previous AI wave, and what p benets do you see it bringing?
q AMR r : Generative AI s is transformative t because, for the rst time in history, u we have AI systems that can interpret human language as we do, which is v unprecedented.
It represents a milestone in the user interface between humans w and soware.
x e analogy I share about this moment is the leap from command-line interfaces y to Windows 95 and then the iPhone.
Originally, the only way we could interact with soware was through something called the command line.
If you are old enough to remember DOS, then you remember all the commands and options you had to put aer the commands.
Its a xed set of words and you A A MR A A WADA ll LL AH 38 have to use them in that way.
Very few people knew how to do that right, so the consumption of soware was limited to very few people.
en Windows 95 introduced the concept of menus and a mouse that you can move around.
So, instead of remembering the commands, you can pick the command on the menu.
e forms were a lot more intuitive with nice user interface modalities, which open up the consumption of soware for consumers or inside of businesses, or to a bigger class of people.
However, we literally had to rewrite all of our soware to adapt every single application that worked in the command line to work in this new way.
at was the rst phase of how we evolved our interaction with soware.
e following phase was the iPhone and touch screens, which opened up the consumption of technology to many more people because everybody knows how to use their ngers.
However, it also meant, again, that we had to rewrite every single application that we used both in and outside of the enterprise.
We had to evolve it to leverage this new modality of interaction.
Today, generative AI technologies allow us to interact with soware in the same way we interact with each other.
We can introduce the soware to this particular task or assignment, and it can ask What do you want me to help you with today?
You can just say it verbally or write it down, and the soware will gure out how to do it for you.
Of course, its not perfect yet, but we have the beginnings of that.
e consumption will become ubiquitous; everybody will be able to use soware to do their tasks.
It will be just like in the previous waves, and thats the trend trajectory my company is betting on.
Every single soware application in the next 5 or 10 years will need to be rewritten to leverage this new modality of interaction.
ats what we are about enabling and asking, What are the benets of this wave?
Of course, its going to depend on the use case and the application, but the common benet all of these things will have is eciency.
Whatever used to take us hours or days to do, well now be able to do in minutes.
A A MR A A WADA ll LL AH 39 LISA : How does generative AI transform the search for information?
AMR : We are moving from the old method which was about search engines where you search documentation and the web, to get back a list of results or a !
bunch of videos you can watch to get something done.
Now, instead of a list " of results, we can just have the answer.
# For example, I might ask: How do I take a vacation using Workday?
And it $ would say Step number one, you do this, step number two, you do that and % so on until youre done.
If we get that answer correct every single time without & hallucinations, then we can move from answer engines to action engines, which ' means it would say, Step one, do this, step two, do that, and do you want me ( to do that for you?
And if I say yes then it reasons with you to understand the ) context and guides you.
It completes the task without you having to interact 0 with any forms, without you having to learn how the soware works.
It adapts 1 to you and your style and how youre answering the questions to get the task 2 done.
And thats the journey were on.
Were moving from legacy, which is 3 where we had to search for information to nd how we can do something, to 4 answers.
Its a move from having the answer for How can we do it right away?
5 to where it just does the action for me so I can move on.
6 e action can be a simple task like taking a vacation using Workday, or the 7 action could be Im looking at these two lawsuits right now.
I want a legal dra 8 of how this lawsuit is going to be structured.
Look at all the previous lawsuits 9 that were similar to those I wrote, or ones that other lawyers and other teams @ wrote, and compare that to the judges and what they ruled, how they said yes A or no, and whether it succeeded or not.
en summarize all of that into a new B legal dra so that I, as a lawyer, can start working now to nish my task.
e C lawyer now nishes doing the dra in literally 15 minutes versus 5 weeks of D research before.
is is really what were talking about eciency.
Everything E is going to be 100 times more ecient.
A A MR A A WADA ll LL AH 40 F ose of us who know how to embrace that eciency in our jobs are probably G using ChatGPT in H one shape or form right I now.
But those of us who know how P to embrace it and leverage it will be 100 times more productive in everything Q we do, and those of us that dont will fall behind.
R LISA S : Which tasks does AI now perform better than humans?
T AMR U : e fear of job V loss is not W because of AI but, as I like to say, because of X those who know how to use AI versus those who dont.
Ultimately, job security Y will depend on the ability to leverage AI although there are some roles, like ` customer support and driving, which may become obsolete due to automation.
a Five years from now, I foresee there wont be humans working in call centers or b customer support.
And in 10 years, there will be fewer human drivers.
Today, in c San Francisco you can call a car with an app that will arrive without a driver, d pick you up and drop you o where you want.
In my opinion, its the perfect e driver, and represents a signicant advancement in technology.
I envisage that f tasks such as these will be completely replaced, but in the majority of cases, its g going to be people who know how to leverage the h technology i to their advantage p who will keep their jobs.
q LISA r : How will the leading technology companies impact generative AI, and s whats your dierentiation strategy?
t AMR u : Everybody is v waking w up to x the power that generative y AI oers.
e big players are all going to have eyes on this.
When I was building Cloudera to do big data analytics it was the same thing.
Big data analytics was a big eld, and the big players were all there.
It did not prevent me from growing Cloudera to be a $5 billion company.
It did not prevent Snowake from building a $50 billion company, despite the big players having some of the best databases; for instance, Microso has SQL, Cosmos and Cosmos DB, and also provides Azure Active Directory for identity management.
AWS has Redshi and Google has BigQuery oering data warehousing solutions.
Despite the big players having all these, Snowake is still able to succeed.
In other words, this is a huge, huge A A MR A A WADA ll LL AH 41 marketplace and tons and tons of investment will happen over the next few years.
Im not worried by the big players jumping into this same space.
For many companies in this world, IT is not their thing.
ey are about manufacturing, they are about healthcare, they are about law and so on.
Because theyre working on contracts, they dont have the engineering teams to go and build something as powerful as this.
So, Vectaras key dierentiation is about ease of use.
How can we build a system that any IT person managing the laptops of a company can integrate into their workows and start leveraging it to do something?
We oer a very, very simple, easy-to-use platform from end to end.
It is similar to Snowake.
ey came in with simplicity and it worked very well for them.
But we also have some core IP around the hallucination issue that I mentioned.
Minimizing hallucination, bias and copyright abuse are key issues that anybody thinking about deploying this technology cares about.
LISA : How does your platform provide a unique advantage to its users?
AMR : We integrate a ChatGPT kind of experience by making it a function of the proprietary data you have in your organization.
For instance, if youre a lawyer with an extensive archive of past contracts, our platform enables you to utilize that wealth of information in current legal work.
Similarly, a PR rm can leverage a history of press releases, and a bridge construction company can access a repository of construction plans, workows, and supply chain details.
Even an investor can input a multitude of investment pitches and memos into the system.
en, when you ask it a question or set a task, its answering not because of its knowledge of the world like ChatGPT does, but rather because of the knowledge of what you have.
So, the key strength of our platform lies in its ability to provide context-specic responses informed by your organizations accumulated knowledge.
And because its responses are grounded in your data, it doesnt have to hallucinate as much.
Hallucination !
arises because it doesnt know what it doesnt know " but, by always grounding it in your own data, it reduces hallucination.
A A MR A A WADA ll LL AH 42 # LISA $ : If it is only using the data from that company, how can it be as smart % and responsive as ChatGPT?
& AMR ' : ats a very ( good ) question.
e process is analogous to human learning.
0 Consider a college education where you absorb a vast array of information from 1 books and lectures.
Similarly, we train large language models on extensive 2 datasets, distilling the essence of that information into a compressed form.
3 is is akin to summarizing key concepts in your memory without retaining 4 every detail.
When recalling information, sometimes your brain lls in the 5 gaps with what it believes to be correct, which is similar to what we refer to as 6 hallucination in AI.
Despite compressing internet-scale data by a signicant factor, 7 the resulting model can still respond intelligently within its knowledge scope.
8 LISA 9 : When compressing data, how does the model determine what information @ is valuable and whats not?
A AMR B : Filtering the C data D involves two primary methods.
Because the quality E of the source data signicantly inuences the models performance, a human F curator will initially review, rene, and clean up the input data to guide the G model.
Post-training, we employ a technique called Reinforcement Learning H from Human Feedback (RLHF), where I the model learns from its errors as P humans correct its misguided outputs, saying Dont say this again, bad model.
Q While not infallible, this method helps the model avoid rubbish or irrelevant R areas in its brain, reducing inaccuracies.
S LISA T : How does the platform ensure accuracy when working with a companys U proprietary data?
V AMR W : e X solution Y is that you have to retain the original data rather than ` compressing it, akin to a model with a photographic memory.
e AI has a a foundational understanding of language (for example, English, German, b Chinese) and domain-specic concepts (legal, manufacturing, engineering, A A MR A A WADA ll LL AH 43 c health, and so on) so it has the framework to read, interpret, reason, and process d the information but it doesnt have the information itself.
It relies on the factual e data provided by the company for generating responses.
When queried, the AI f correlates the question with the relevant facts before generating a response.
g In this way, we are grounding the solution in facts that come directly from h the proprietary data of that customer or user.
is signicantly minimizes i hallucination because we explicitly tell the model to think about it in a very p specic way, for example, with a prompt like, You are a nancial analyst.
Only q answer this question.
And the question is, should I invest in this company or r not as a function of these facts?
And then the facts are the previous decisions s similar to this decision.
t We would also say: If the facts do not help explain this question, say I dont u know, dont make something up.
Say literally I dont know how to answer the v question.
If the facts are relevant to the question, then please summarize them w together in a cohesive response and cite every single fact that you used to come x up with a conclusion in the response so we can get the condence youre not y making stu up.
Its like the fact-checking that newspapers do with articles.
LISA : Given the skill and expertise of creating accurate prompts, are you tailoring your product to specic vertical use cases for more eective use?
AMR : I have two answers to that.
e rst, the visionary perspective, takes a page from history.
When breakthroughs like the iPhone and Windows 95 came out, predicting the full spectrum of apps theyd enable was beyond our reach.
For instance, we anticipated that many of our basic apps had to transition to the iPhone to work with a touch screen, but innovations like Snapchat or Tinders unique swipe right and le were unforeseen.
So, with that caveat, I acknowledge there will be unforeseen applications of our product as well.
A A MR A A WADA ll LL AH 44 On the practical side, were gaining traction with certain applications.
For instance, every business needs one-on-one customer support, yet today, even with us, there can be hallucinations.
So, while some clients are okay with an agent talking directly to their customers, we oer others human assisted support, which means a human is in the loop.
Were also seeing signicant interest in knowledge discovery and analysis across various sectors from nancial analysts to legal professionals, and even in pharmaceutical research and media monitoring.
Our current client base spans these areas, demonstrating the versatility of our product.
Some of our use cases include: Customer support: via digital agent chatbots or human agent assist, providing Q&A capabilities.
Knowledge discovery, research and analysis: aiding nancial analysts, supporting legal cases/contracts review, assisting pharmaceutical research, and enhancing media/news monitoring.
Legal e-discovery Monitoring for insider trading/anti-money laundering (AML) compliance Analysis of user-generated content Enhanced eCommerce search functionalities Robust enterprise search solutions A A MR A A WADA ll LL AH 45 ) Figure 4.
1 Vectara generative AI use cases 0 LISA 1 : Will you specialize in certain verticals such as healthcare?
And do you 2 believe that domain expertise can be applied across dierent sectors?
3 AMR 4 : Absolutely, our 5 concept is 6 truly elastic across industries, but to successfully 7 launch a platform or any startup for that matter you need to focus on 8 specic verticals.
And to speak condently within a vertical, you need to know 9 the language.
For instance, in healthcare, you need to know how to talk to @ medical people, and be conversant with medical terminology and compliance A requirements.
Similarly, if youre getting into nance, you need to have some B compliance.
So, we have four verticals that were very focused on right now: C health, legal, nance and media/tech.
But there are also many others including D manufacturing, customer support, and a smaller vertical for call centers.
Further E verticals will come later on, but these are the ones were picking right now.
F We want to be an analytic platform that is useful for many, many verticals.
G ere will be large language models that are optimized for dierent verticals, H for example, Googles Med-PaLM excels in the health sector, Bloombergs I nance-oriented model is outstanding, while Harvey targets legal applications P A A MR A A WADA ll LL AH 46 Q in London.
Our capability is to federate across these models.
We dont build R the language models ourselves, instead, we position ourselves as the nal S integrative step.
T Clients oen have interdisciplinary queries.
A hospital, while primarily concerned U with medical questions, may occasionally need to address legal, accounting, V or nancial matters.
Our platform is designed to intelligently detect the type W of question and utilize the best language model for that inquiry, simplifying X the process for our clients.
Y Our clients dont need to research which model to use, we handle it seamlessly ` on their behalf.
is curation is one of the core values we oer, much like a Twilos facilitation of communication across various telecom networks or b Stripes streamlined access to nancial networks, so you can charge a client c money and have relationships with Wells Fargo and J.
Morgan and Capital d One.
Or you can just sign up with, for example, Stripe once and they say, We e have a simple API and were going to pick the best banking partner for you f depending on what youre trying to do.
Similarly, we g arbitrate across the most h eective resources, ensuring our clients benet from the best available solution.
i LISA p : As a new product, what customer expectations do you have q to overcome?
r AMR s : e biggest t hurdle is u the integration part, how to get the data from the v clients content system into our system.
is is where the friction tends to be.
w Its more about how do I plug in the pipes in the right places?
But once you x plug in the pipes, its smooth sailing from there.
ats my experience from y many clients.
A A MR A A WADA ll LL AH 47 Key Takeaways Context to generative AI : e AI evolution is currently focused on generative AI, following a wave that included: : detected fraud, identied quality issues, and diagnosed diseases by recognizing data patterns.
Clustering algorithms : grouped product/user behaviors for eective marketing strategies.
Forecasting : predicted future scenarios, such as machinery failure or stock price movements, using time series analysis.
Impact of generative AI on software applications : Generative AI deciphers human language and enhances the user-soware interface.
ese technologies are expected to impact many soware applications and improve eciencies so that tasks that once consumed hours or days can be completed in mere minutes.
Learning process of AI : e learning process of AI involves absorbing vast information and distilling it into a compressed form, much like human learning.
e process of data compression and ltering involves an initial review and renement by a human curator and post-training correction of misguided outputs.
In-depth industry knowledge : A strategic focus on specic industry verticals, and the understanding of the unique language of each, is imperative for a more context-relevant LLM solution.
49 5 Philipp H H eltewig Co-Founder and CEO at Cognigy ( ere is no magic bullet.
Implementing AI solutions in ) customer service still requires careful planning, development, 0 time, and, crucially, human involvementLooking ahead its 1 reasonable to predict that most customer service interactions 2 will be handled by AI systems, except perhaps for very 3 premium oerings.
e adoption of AI by BPOs is a positive 4 step toward a more ecient and cost-eective model, blending 5 the consistency of AI solutions with human touch where its 6 most valuable, oering the best of both worlds.
LinkedIn: heltewig 9 PHI l L I pp PP H H E l L TEWIG 50 @ Philipp Heltewig A is a German tech entrepreneur with a strong foundation in B computer science and business.
He has international experience, primarily in C the eld of enterprise soware.
He previously led the global sales for Sitecore, an D AI-driven digital marketing company, until its sale in 2016.
Following that, he E co-founded Cognigy, which has become a prominent gure in the conversational F AI industry, focusing on automating contact centers for clients around the world.
G Cognigys self-service solutions aim to improve the customer experience and H support contact center agents in real time as they interact with customers.
Philipp I is recognized as a pioneering leader in creating conversational AI experiences P and has authored content on innovating customer service through voice AI.
Q His contributions at Cognigy have been pivotal in transforming both customer R and employee experiences in the corporate sector through conversational AI.
S LISA T : How do your clients benet from using AI in customer service, and what U unique advantages do AI services provide?
V PHILIPP W : e primary X objective Y for most of Cognigys clients is to enhance ` customer satisfaction.
While cost savings are a real potential benet, they can be a realized in various ways through implementing AI solutions in customer service.
b e common perception of AI in customer service is largely centered around c chatbots.
However, AI-driven services can oer much more, such as real-time d translation that enables customer services in multiple languages, even if the e agents are only f procient g in English.
h LISA i : How does Cognigy work with clients to maximize AIs potential in p their operations?
q PHILIPP r : Ill describe s how we t collaborate with clients to identify needs.
First u and foremost, its important to clarify that Cognigy is a soware vendor.
We v partner with companies like Deloitte, Accenture, and Deutsche Telecom, who w handle the bulk of the implementation of our product.
Our clients generally x fall into two categories.
e rst type is more experienced and understands PHI l L I pp PP H H E l L TEWIG 51 y that conversational and generative AI is the solution to their problem, and they typically have their ROI (Return on Investment) models built out.
e second type of customer is aware of the problem but may not fully understand the potential solution, such as implementing AI.
Its this second group whom we oen work directly with, or sometimes through a partner, to help them understand and establish ROI cases.
Our deployment strategy revolves around four key factors: Customer satisfaction : is is straightforward.
A satised customer is more likely to be a repeat customer.
Cost savings : ese can be achieved through operational eciencies in the contact center, such as improved translation or overall agent eciency.
Improved agent experience : is is crucial in an industry prone to high agent turnover due to stress and burnout.
Improving the customer experience also improves the agent experience, reducing negativity and turnover.
Increased revenue : is can be achieved through upselling.
For example, we recently worked with a retailer of premium wines.
By implementing agent assist technology, which listens to the conversation between the buyer and the agent and makes recommendations based on purchase history and customer prole, we were able to increase the average basket size, leading to increased revenue.
We work closely with our customers, oen in workshops, to help them understand these benets and build a business case to justify the investment in our technology.
LISA : How does AI integration shape your project stages and address challenges?
PHILIPP : Our key initiatives are the critical steps or objectives in a project.
While AI is transformative, it doesnt alter the fundamental structure of our project stages, which include initial presentations, discovery workshops, and implementation planning.
AI acts as an aid at various stages, enhancing ideation, assisting in project planning and content creation.
However, due to particular PHI l L I pp PP H H E l L TEWIG 52 uncertainties, specically related to compliance with the European Union AI !
Act, we allocate extra time to the resolution of these concerns.
" LISA # : Do you encounter misconceptions about AIs role in development $ and creation?
% PHILIPP & : I think its ' essential to ( understand that AI, while increasing eciency ) and simulating human tasks, is not a standalone solution.
Its a tool that helps us 0 get things done more eciently.
e belief that AI can independently produce 1 a nal product based on a simple command is a misconception.
It may work 2 in a basic demo scenario, but, in reality, human involvement is still crucial.
3 AI is here to assist us, not replace us.
4 LISA 5 : When and how does Cognigy approach vendor partners?
6 PHILIPP 7 : We actively partner with leaders in the contact center space, including 8 Genesys, Avaya, 8x8, and 9 NICE.
Some of these vendors have their own AI @ capabilities, which may be sucient for some customers.
However, for more A complex projects with clients like Allianz Insurance or Luhansa Group, their B out-of-the-box capabilities may not be enough.
is is not straightforward C given the challenges of fragmented systems and legacy architecture, plus the D need for data integration and regulatory compliance.
E Its crucial to ensure that data access is compliant with regulations.
As a company F founded in Germany, weve had to deal with GDPR from the very beginning and G we hold all kinds of certications and have strong tools around data protection, H data privacy, and compliance auditing.
I In many large tenders, the list of potential vendors oen gets whittled down to P just a few due to compliance requirements.
Our ability to meet these requirements Q is one of our core strengths and a key reason why we are a leader in enterprise R conversational AI.
PHI l L I pp PP H H E l L TEWIG 53 S LISA T : Given your deep capabilities, is your architecture and approach more U vertical than the horizontal approach of larger vendors?
V PHILIPP W : is is a X pertinent question.
At Cognigy, we essentially oer two Y products.
e rst is our platform oering, which is designed for customers ` who want to build and control the AI models themselves.
is is ideal for a those who have established centers of excellence or are working with partners.
b e second is a comprehensive solution we c call AI as a Service (AlaaS) where d we work closely with the customer to relieve their burden by understanding e their AI needs, and then manage everything for them.
is is a cloud-based f oering that allows organizations to leverage AI tools and services without g needing to build and maintain AI infrastructure and expertise in-house.
h While our platform is not specically verticalized, we do oer starter kits i for various industries, recognized by Gartner Research as one of our core p strengths.
However, our AI as a Service approach is more verticalized, focusing q mainly on ve specic verticals where we have built up distinct intellectual r property.
is allows us to provide tailored solutions to meet the unique needs s of dierent industries.
t LISA u : How are you mitigating the risk of deepfakes and generative AI being v used by bad actors in customer service?
w PHILIPP x : e y nature of our industry makes it dicult for deepfakes to be used maliciously so their impact is minimal on our business.
However, the societal implications are indeed concerning.
e ability of AI to create convincing deepfakes, whether in text, audio, or video form, poses a signicant threat to the trust a society has in the authenticity of information to make informed decisions.
Its a complex problem that requires a multifaceted approach to solve, legislation alone wont be enough to address this issue.
PHI l L I pp PP H H E l L TEWIG 54 LISA : How do you assess the readiness of a company to implement your service and what prerequisites must be in place for a successful customer service implementation?
PHILIPP : e level of AI sophistication desired can lead to dierent scenarios.
Here are three we oen see: Knowledge-based AI : is type of AI absorbs your PDF or website content and can answer questions about it.
Its essentially a better type of search.
example, if you ask, My dog Lily weighs 9 kilos.
Can I bring her on board my !
ight with me?
the AI can retrieve the correct answer and generate a tting !
response, such as, Im very sorry.
Unfortunately, you cannot bring Lily on !
board because the maximum permitted weight for dogs is 8 kilos.
Concierge services !
: Sometimes called Identication and Verication (ID&V), !
this involves interacting with a bot that gures out what you want and who you !
It then hands you over to a human agent who is passed this information, !
reducing average handling time.
Some back-end system integration is needed !
for this, to be able to authenticate the call.
End-to-end process automation !
: is is where you want to handle a full !
rebooking, refund, claims process, or package tracking, and so on.
is requires !
deep integration into the enterprises systems.
e success of these scenarios depends less on AI itself and more on the !
preparedness of the existing systems, including the robustness of enterprise !
infrastructures and the accessibility and eciency of the processes they support.
LISA !
: How is the traditional model of outsourcing customer service during !
peak times evolving with the integration of AI technologies?
PHILIPP !
: Its a !
" very !
# good question because outsourcing to BPOs, especially !
$ overseas, has been common to manage service spikes, but AI is changing the !
% game.
AI oers benets like multi-language support and instant scaling, which !
& are reshaping how we handle customer service.
While BPOs are adjusting to !
' this trend, were moving toward a hybrid workforce of AI and humans.
PHI l L I pp PP H H E l L TEWIG 55 !
( Looking ahead, its reasonable to predict that most customer service interactions !
) will be handled by AI systems, except perhaps for very premium oerings.
0 adoption of AI by BPOs is a positive step toward a more ecient and cost- !
1 eective model, blending the consistency of AI solutions with human touch !
2 where its most !
3 valuable, oering !
4 the best of both worlds.
Its an exciting time !
5 for the industry.
6 LISA !
7 : In what ways do customers manage setup and maintenance costs on !
8 their models, and how dependent are they on your support?
9 PHILIPP !
@ : e belief !
A that AI !
B solutions are always costly to set up and maintain !
C doesnt hold true for conversational AI.
Most companies oen start with a !
D core AI model and integrate their specic information, which is less about !
E ne-tuning and more about building on a robust foundation.
While they may !
F initially require regular review and extension, they quickly (for example, within !
G six months), become highly ecient, reducing the need for frequent ne-tuning.
H Generative AI models have a vast amount of basic human knowledge built in, !
I enabling them to provide sensible responses to a wide range of queries with !
P minimal oversight.
is highlights the power and potential of AI to streamline !
Q customer service, so that upkeep becomes less intensive over time, with our !
R clients becoming less reliant on us for maintenance.
S LISA !
T : How do you manage the dynamic nature of customer knowledge, especially !
U in industries like insurance where new classes of insurance emerge.
And how !
V do you address the cost and resources associated with retraining your AI on !
W updated company collateral?
X PHILIPP !
Y : e !
` implementation !
a of AI depends on its complexity level.
For basic !
b informational uses, updating AI is easy and ecient, for example, if a new !
c product is introduced, the relevant PDF can simply be uploaded, and the AI !
d quickly learns the information.
However, this type of AI isnt designed for !
e transactions, like processing purchases or modifying existing products.
PHI l L I pp PP H H E l L TEWIG 56 !
f Fully transactional AI is more challenging to implement, especially in insurance !
g where there are few fully transactional cases.
Checking a claim status is relatively !
h simple, but processing a full claim is more complex.
Some companies prefer !
i to invest in smart routing and identication on various channels rather than !
p tackling transactional use cases due to better ROI.
q In the airline industry, there are high-value use cases like refunds or re-bookings !
r that justify the time and eort to build out.
For instance, Luhansa Group has !
s automated !
t tens !
u of thousands of rebookings and refunds during peak periods.
v LISA !
w : What is the timeframe from initial contact to the delivery of value within !
x a company for this type of endeavor?
y PHILIPP !
: Implementing !
an AI !
solution can range from days to months, depending !
largely on the type of functionality you want to roll out.
For instance, if you !
simply want a bot that can answer questions about the content on your website, !
that can be set up quickly.
However, the process can be lengthened by factors !
such as legal approvals, compliance checks, and technical implementation.
e challenge in rolling out a contact center automation solution isnt primarily !
impacted by the work with the AI, but rather external factors like the availability !
and accessibility of the right APIs, their documentation, and how ready the !
knowledge base is.
In an ideal scenario, where all these factors are perfect, !
implementation could be completed in a week, but this is rarely the case.
large companies, issues such as acquiring API keys can take months.
e development of an AI solution, whether its an FAQ bot or a bot capable of !
handling full transactions, is an ongoing process.
For example, at one of our !
clients, their team went live with their rst solution within two months but !
have since been working for four years on enhancing its capabilities so now !
the solution can do much more than it could initially.
e initial rollout can be quick, but the system needs to be extended and !
improved over time.
is is akin to building a website for a new company.
" e rst one-page website can go live within a week, but a comprehensive site PHI l L I pp PP H H E l L TEWIG 57 " with various transaction capabilities can take up to two years to develop.
e " truth is the development process never really stops as theres always room for " improvement " and expansion.
" LISA " : Given this iterative process, it seems a nuanced understanding is crucial " to set realistic expectations and achieve sustainable success.
" PHILIPP " : Absolutely.
e " advent " of generative AI is a double-edged sword.
On " one hand, it opens up a plethora of amazing use cases, especially in our eld, " allowing us to deliver on the promise of human-like speaking.
" On the other hand, the capabilities of generative AI are oen overestimated " by those not deeply involved in the eld.
For instance, while ChatGPT has " indeed read the entire internet, it doesnt mean it can instantly provide all the " solutions.
Its a useful tool, but it wont dramatically change the timelines of " an enterprise-level IT project.
" In essence, generative AI is a valuable addition to our toolkit, but its not a " magic bullet.
e implementation of AI solutions in an enterprise context still "!
requires careful planning, development, time "" and, crucially, human involvement.
"# LISA "$ : In your view, what percentage of the service gap has been closed?
"% PHILIPP "& : e impact "' of AI implementation can be quantied in various ways.
"( For instance, E.
ON, a large utility provider from Germany, achieved 70% ") automation on their conversational channels through the application of chatbots, "0 and Mobily, a telco from Saudi Arabia, has a 99.
5% faster response time due "1 to their bot.
Bosch achieved a 76% automated resolution rate in one of their "2 conversational AI solutions.
"3 However, quantifying the impact can be challenging for many large enterprises, "4 especially those with unionized employees, as cost savings are seen to potentially "5 lead to layos, even though we havent witnessed that before.
erefore, these "6 gures are oen not shared externally.
PHI l L I pp PP H H E l L TEWIG 58 "7 e true measure of impact might be the potential disruption if the AI solution "8 were turned o.
If our customers were to turn o their conversational AI "9 solutions, their contact centers would struggle signicantly.
is indicates "@ that conversational AI has evolved from a nice-to-have to a must-have in "A many industries.
"B LISA "C : Could you elaborate on the specic generative AI models that Cognigy "D is using?
"E PHILIPP "F : Cognigy is an "G all-inclusive enterprise application that integrates all "H the necessary components for conversational AI applications.
It incorporates "I LLMs, including OpenAI, Azure OpenAI, Google Gemini, Anthropic Claude, "P Cohere, and Aleph Alpha.
e platform allows for the combination of these "Q LLMs in a single conversation, providing maximum exibility to its users.
"R LISA "S : Could you talk us through a specic customer project that youre proud of?
"T PHILIPP "U : Certainly.
A good "V example of how Cognigy.
AI can deliver solutions "W in an agile way is in our work with Luhansa Group.
During the pandemic, we "X partnered with them to leverage conversational AI to transform their customer "Y service in a time of critical need.
& The Business Challenge "a e core of Luhansa Groups business model is to bring people from one "b destination to another.
ey used a highly tuned model, which enabled them "c to forecast booking patterns and manage overbookings eectively.
Cognigy "d had already started an initial integration of conversational AI with Luhansa "e Group but the use cases were all based on business needs before the pandemic "f which, obviously, changed the paradigm.
PHI l L I pp PP H H E l L TEWIG 59 "g e unprecedented disruption to normal life was acutely felt in the aviation "h industry.
Luhansa Groups service centers experienced a surge in call volumes "i with new types of queries and an increase in the average call handling time both "p due to their growing complexity and because junior sta were increasingly having "q to deal with them.
is all resulted in service centers oen being unreachable, "r which meant a negative customer experience that led to bad press.
Luhansa "s Group came to us to help tackle these challenges.
' Context-dependent issues ' ' ' Increase in manual contact volumes ' when the business is operating at peak ' and there is an event in the network, such as a thunderstorm over one of the ( major hubs, the entire business is impacted.
In the pandemic, this was acute ( with a surge in the volume of people contacting us over a couple of weeks, ( with all the stress associated with canceled ights and refund requests.
( ( ( Higher average handling time of calls ( as cases grew in complexity, multiplied ( by high sta attrition.
More junior people were working on more complex ( cases which is the worst combination in customer service.
( ) ) Increase in chat channel usage ) as customer communication preferences ) shied to use of chat channels through Instagram, direct messaging, Twitter, ) Facebook Messenger, and web chat.
) ) ) The type of customer questions evolved ) from how many bags can I bring?
) to baggage allowances to specics about health and safety protocols, such as 0 the type of masks required for ights from Germany to Dubai.
0 0 0 Poor accessibility of customer centers 0 during the COVID-19 pandemic, 0 led to a deterioration in customer service.
PHI l L I pp PP H H E l L TEWIG 60 0 Approach # Cognigys agile conversational AI development was restarted from previous # projects with Luhansa Group to address specic customer needs during # dierent phases of the pandemics impact on business continuity, focusing on # priority use cases: 1 1 1 Re-open the skies was initiated with one airline, one use case and one 1 language, focusing 1 on providing travel information and requirements via a 1 simple click bot.
1 1 1 Oering refund capabilities due to the impact of virus variants on ight 2 schedules.
is transactional use case was widely used.
2 2 2 Flight schedule changes enabled self-service rebooking for customers due to 2 sta shortages disrupting ight operations.
2 2 2 Managing peak operations by proactively handling customer re-bookings.
#( e setup included ve teams developing the conversational AI experience #) for Luhansa Groups customer service, with other business units joining in.
#0 ese teams were: 3 3 3 Continuous Improvement that focused on current use cases and FAQs.
3 3 3 Rebooking that built two major rebooking functionalities schedule change 3 and voluntary rebooking.
3 3 4 Personalization and Payment that managed the integration of customer 4 proles and personalization.
4 4 4 Service Centre Integration that focused on integration with the 4 4 service center.
4 4 4 Brussels Airline Migration was a fourth airline that joined the 5 Cognigy infrastructure.
PHI l L I pp PP H H E l L TEWIG 61 #Q Whats next?
5 5 5 Fine-tuning:Were gearing up for peak season by optimizing our operations 5 to ensure a seamless experience for our users.
5 5 5 User prole integration:Were enhancing the chat experience by integrating 5 user proles.
is will eliminate the need for re-entering booking codes and 6 names.
Customers can just enter their details once in the app, and youre 6 good to go!
6 6 6 Service center integration:Were deeply integrating our services into the 6 service center landscape, with a special focus on voice interactions.
6 Results and Impact #g ese solutions were rolled out across multiple airlines with signicant and #h growing positive impact on levels of customer service.
#i Impacts included: 7 7 7 ere has 7 been a signicant shi from manual contact volumes to self-service 7 platforms.
Simple cases are now automated, resulting in shorter chat lengths, 7 with the complexity of the case determining the extent of conversation required.
7 7 7 Since 2019, chat channel volume has increased by over 2,000% and is projected 7 to continue rising.
8 8 8 e understanding of topics within chats has greatly improved, oering clear 8 insights into dynamic changes and areas of competence.
is enhanced clarity 8 and transparency benets both chat and voice platforms, with chat oering 8 a more transparent view of what is eective.
8 8 8 e system is highly accessible and scalable, managing hundreds of concurrent 8 chats eciently, contrasting with the limitations of handling a similar volume 9 of voice calls.
PHI l L I pp PP H H E l L TEWIG 62 9 9 9 Machine translation has been employed to reduce language barriers, allowing 9 agents to assist customers in dierent languages seamlessly.
For instance, 9 English-speaking agents based on Fiji can eectively handle chats in German for 9 a traditional airline, with neither side being aware of the language 9 dierences, 9 thus fostering inclusivity and improving customer assistance.
# LISA $ : Could you please provide some insights into your discussions as an $ advisor to government ministers on AI-related matters?
$ PHILIPP $ : ese $ discussions have been really insightful with some common $ themes emerging which I would emphasize to business leaders.
e fact is $ AI is already here.
Its not a future technology.
It will touch all aspects of our $ business and professional lives so, if youre not focused on and thinking about $ its application, you need to be or else you will get le behind.
I think every $ company should have a Chief AI Ocer and every government will have a $ Minister for AI.
Educating our children in the use of these technologies now is $ paramount.
Other geographies, such as Asia, are already dramatically ahead.
$ Finally, I think governments have an important role in tackling the issues of $ truthfulness, fake news, and so on to protect democracy.
A Key Takeaways A A A Transformative impact of AI in customer service A : AI-driven services go A beyond B chatbots in customer service.
ey oer real-time translation for B multilingual support, automate responses to customer queries, and provide B real-time customer interaction data to agents.
is enhances eciency, reduces B handling time, and creates upselling opportunities.
e main goal is to boost B customer satisfaction, with cost savings as a potential benet.
B B B AI in project stages B : AI doesnt alter the fundamental structure of project B stages, but C acts as an aid at various stages, enhancing ideation, assisting C in project planning and content creation.
However, AI is not a standalone C solution, its a tool that helps us get things done more eciently.
PHI l L I pp PP H H E l L TEWIG 63 C C C Data access and compliance C : Its C crucial to ensure that data access is compliant C with regulations.
is includes adherence to standards such as the General C Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), obtaining necessary compliance D D certications, and employing robust tools for data protection and privacy.
D Regular compliance auditing is also a key component of this process.
ese D measures collectively help in maintaining the integrity of the data and D safeguarding it against potential breaches.
D D D Assessing company readiness D : e readiness of a company to implement D AI E services depends on the level of AI sophistication desired.
is can range E from knowledge-based AI to concierge services to end-to-end process E automation.
e maturity required for these scenarios is more about the E readiness of the systems in place and the accessibility and processes around E these enterprise systems.
E E E Evolution of outsourcing model E : e traditional model of outsourcing customer E service F during peak times is evolving with the integration of AI technologies.
F AI oers benets like multi-language support and instant scaling, reshaping F how customer service is handled.
e future likely involves a hybrid workforce F of AI and humans.
F F F Timeframe for AI implementation F : Implementing an AI solution can range F from a F day to three years, depending on the type of functionality you want G to roll out.
For instance, when implementing an automation solution for a G contact center the factors that will most impact the timeline are related to G preparation such as the availability and accessibility of the right APIs, their G documentation, and G how ready the knowledge base is.
G G G Ongoing development process G : e development of an AI solution, whether G its H an FAQ bot or a bot capable of handling full transactions, is an ongoing H process.
e initial rollout can be quick, but the system needs to be extended H and improved over time.
PHI l L I pp PP H H E l L TEWIG 64 H H H The future of AI in the BPO industry H : AI is H expected to increasingly handle H most customer service interactions, signifying a major BPO industry shi.
H Knowledge AI can be easily updated, but in industries like insurance with I few fully transactional I cases, scaling the use of AI is more complex.
I I I Mitigating risks in AI implementation I : Ensuring data access compliance I with I regulations, holding various certications, and employing robust tools for I data protection, privacy, and compliance auditing are crucial.
65 I 6 P M M iao Song P % With AI technology evolving apace, businesses need to % ask how they should set up to support this technology, % considering their layout, energy consumption, and future % digital infrastructure.
A robust new business model needs to % think through all these things P LinkedIn: P miao-song-815877 % M M IAO SONG 66 % Miao Song % is the Chief Information Ocer at GLP and directs all facets of % technology within the organization, and spearheads the companys worldwide % data and digital strategy.
% Prior to her role at GLP, Miao held a board member position and served as the % global CIO at Mars Petcare, where she played a pivotal role in driving digital % transformation and innovation.
Before that, she was Vice President and CIO % at Johnson & Johnson.
% In 2019, she was named Chief Information Ocer of the Year Europe, by % the International Data Group.
% LISA %!
: In your role at GLP, what was the core business problem you were trying %" to solve?
%# MIAO %$ : Fundamentally it %% was to use data to create value to help the company %& grow both their top and bottom line.
And analytics was the core of this digital %' transformation to drive more value from our data assets.
%( I focused on two components: how to integrate data science to create new %) value and how to increase business intelligence for customers and investors %0 across the enterprise.
%1 Until recently, there was a great deal of reporting on what had happened in the %2 past and little about what is going to happen in the future.
e business context %3 contributed to this problem too as the whole landscape was behind the times.
%4 Leveraging both internal and external datasets, weve now made good progress %5 and launched a new business model across dierent regions.
roughout the %6 process, we %7 maintained a clear focus, asking for every initiative, What is the %8 business problem we are solving?
M M IAO SONG 67 %9 LISA %@ : Can you explain your initial process and what your rst moves were?
%A MIAO %B : e process %C was challenging as it was a very decentralized organization, %D with lots of dierent initiatives.
In addition, there was a lack of well-dened %E processes and structures, as well as local data governance and data ownership.
%F To identify potential AI applications, we began by examining several key areas %G of our investment practice: the assets, the properties, and the customers.
%H is analysis revealed the need for a comprehensive data management strategy.
We %I implemented holistic governance and new technology to support the AI strategy.
%P One of the rst things we also did two years ago was to hire new talent, which %Q bought in fresh thinking and energy.
Now, we still have a way to go but we have %R generated a lot of excitement about what we can deliver by using data better.
%S LISA %T : What leadership support did you have?
%U MIAO %V : We had %W strong global sponsorship from our CEO and leadership in %X each country which led to signicantly improved visibility of our investments, %Y allowing us to share them across the company more eectively.
%` LISA %a : What was the state of data when you arrived?
%b MIAO %c : e data %d was very fragmented, with quality and integration issues.
So, %e we launched a data governance and %f Master Data Management (MDM) program %g which was a core foundation.
We did a lot of hard work, such as diving into the %h property details, and the whole process was challenging and took 12 months to %i ensure it was correct and to get decent quality.
In parallel, we started to collect %p internal data into a single platform and external data (for example, competitor %q data and marketing information), and inject it into the same data platform.
%r e companys previous variable approach across regions stemmed from the %s fact that their investment approach varied across regions, but with the rapid M M IAO SONG 68 %t globalization of the business we simply had to build a global data platform %u and build the property %v data asset into the single platform.
%w LISA %x : What changes and benets are you seeing from the new systems?
%y MIAO % : Weve now % got global visibility of the core business and enabled automation % of the business insight work.
is is enabling us to move from lagged reporting % to prediction and forecasting.
In the investment space, were using data to make % predictions all things we just couldnt have done without the foundational % work we did.
% In terms of data processes, the nature of the investment industry tends to be % more fragmented, compared to something like consumer healthcare, which % does lead to quality problems.
eres still a lot of work on modeling and % capturing in Excel which were trying to automate and digitize, but 50% is % still being processed by analytics on Excel.
Our go-forward approach has two % key components: (1) digitizing data processing to streamline and improve % eciency, and (2) implementing data-driven modeling.
We are using cloud % tools but Im realistic, so were not getting rid of Excel but instead minimizing % its usage and improving accuracy.
% LISA % : What resources did you put in place?
% MIAO % : We have a % hybrid model between a decentralized and global team and & we also have a data team in China, Europe, and Singapore, too.
We have created & a new global data community of practice and co-drive initiatives.
& We employed a consulting rm to bring in best practices, so we dont have to & gure everything out on our own.
And, for governance, we used a consulting & rm to understand the methodology and mixture.
M M IAO SONG 69 & LISA & : How did you maintain focus?
& MIAO & : We built through intention, only using business cases and KPIs with a & focus on problems to & solve.
We challenged ourselves to continually look at the & outcome of every single initiative and clearly forecast the size of the prize, for & example, linking to the evolution of a global customer strategy.
& LISA & : Can you share any insights regarding the transformation of businesses & into AI-led enterprises?
& MIAO & : In a & previous company, I observed a large data initiative with a large & investment really ounder because it lacked a clear objective.
It took two years, & and it yielded no business value.
Just a change from A to B.
is really illustrated &!
the fact that you need to be business and not tech-driven if you want impactful &" results.
Focus on tackling problems that will make a fundamental dierence.
&# So, I would advise not starting too big or with initiatives with long timeframes.
&$ Aim for small initiatives that make a big impact to show tangible results and &% gain top-level support.
&& Dont overlook fundamentals such as data quality and governance.
Establish &' the community of practice on day 1, rather than a year later, and work with &( the business hand in hand.
Finally, its important to nd good talent in the &) space youre operating in.
&0 LISA &1 : What are you most excited about in the future?
&2 MIAO &3 : Undoubtedly, its &4 OpenAI.
With the technology evolving faster than we &5 anticipated, were asking what does it mean for our business when it comes to &6 piloting and testing, and what can we do better?
&7 With AI technology evolving apace, businesses need to ask how they should set &8 up to support this technology, considering their layout, energy consumption, &9 and future digital infrastructure.
A robust new business model needs to think &@ through all these things.
M M IAO SONG 70 &A is tech is truly revolutionary, and we can already see in our industry how its &B going to impact legal jobs, and ntech analytics where research can be made &C considerably more ecient.
I know young people who were thinking about &D jobs in investment banking who are now reconsidering their choices.
&E Machine learning and AI are radically changing our business landscape with &F lots of investment going into this area.
Every large company is working on it &G right now.
It will change the way businesses will run, and public services, such &H as healthcare in &I particular, will change tremendously.
e Key Takeaways e e e Foundational role of analytics e : Data analytics serves as the fundamental stage e for any successful AI initiative.
By implementing robust analytics practices, e organizations can extract valuable insights to drive strategic decisions and e actions.
is analytics foundation prepares the organization for strategic e AI applications.
e f f Aligning AI with business goals f : To ensure impactful results, its vital to f understand the business context and implement a comprehensive data f management strategy with governance.
Rather than being solely tech-driven, f this strategy should focus on business priority initiatives.
f f f Talent acquisition f : Hiring new talent is a key step that can infuse fresh g thinking and energy into the organization.
g g g Leadership support g : Securing strong sponsorship from the CEO is crucial g in inspiring the organization to be ambitious, prioritizing focus and g investment, including redesigning the business model to make the best use g of AI advancements.
M M IAO SONG 71 g g h Overcoming data silos h : A decentralized operating model creates fragmented h data and integration issues.
To address these challenges, a strong data h management foundation is crucial.
It should include data governance, h Master Data Management (MDM), and a global data platform to integrate h data assets from various sources.
h h h Community of practice h : Establish a community of practice from the outset i to accelerate cross-functional collaboration, problem-solving, knowledge i sharing, innovation, and learnings.
is builds trust and understanding.
73 i 7 i R R uben O O rtega i General Partner at Enjoy the Work & I was talking to a VC recently who just raised a $20 million & fund all focused on generative AI and I said, What are you & looking at?
And one of the rst things they led with was & Were looking for companies that have access to unique data.
& Its becoming a core part of their investment theses.
p LinkedIn: p rubeneortega ' R R UBEN O O RTEGA 74 ' Ruben Ortega ' is a technologist and leader who has previously worked with ' Amazon, Google, Nordstrom, and Pinterest.
He has built technologies and ' products that have scaled to millions of transactions per day, and generated ' billions of dollars in revenue per year.
He established Amazons rst engineering ' oce in Palo Alto, Googles Seattle oce, and Pinterests rst engineering oce ' in Seattle.
He is currently mentoring startup founders as a General Partner ' at Enjoy e Work.
' LISA ' : Give us a brief summary of your career up to now.
' RUBEN ' : I graduated from ' the University of Washington in 1994 with an M.
' in Computer Science and Engineering and was fortunate to spend almost a ' decade at Amazon starting in 1998.
I accumulated 40 patents related to data, ' coding, and technology, and built wildly successful search engine technologies.
' Aer that, I worked as the site lead for Google, focusing on search and their ' big query system.
Following a brief stint as VP of eCommerce at Nordstrom, '!
I spent two years building Pinterests rst distributed oce in Seattle where '" we developed soware in support of ads, marketing and machine learning.
'# Today, I am an advisor to a variety of companies.
Its exciting to work with '$ startups and guide them in their growth.
'% LISA '& : What was it like in the early days of Amazon?
'' RUBEN '( : It was a ') really interesting time.
e growth rate was incredible and it '0 was truly amazing what we were able to deliver with so few resources in so short '1 a time.
I remember we delivered our rst search engine capable of handling '2 languages like German and French.
However, we made some really amateur '3 mistakes, such as neglecting diacritics, like umlauts, at one point!
Luckily it '4 mostly worked and as we got better, we had the resources to add the polish it '5 needed to be great.
R R UBEN O O RTEGA 75 '6 LISA '7 : What are some tips for getting organizations to adopt data and AI practices?
'8 RUBEN '9 : Ive discovered '@ a useful approach is to reframe it as an experiment 'A problem rather than a data or AI problem.
Google did loads of great research 'B that showed that psychological safety is crucial for eective teams.
So, by 'C changing the language from success/failure to control/experiment, we created 'D a safe environment for discussions.
Communicating that failures are part 'E of the process and emphasizing ongoing experimentation can also help shi 'F the mindset.
'G My question to any company is always What experiments are you running 'H and how are you gathering your data, then how are you storing it?
is is 'I especially important when working on machine learning and AI.
Garbage in, 'P garbage out, still applies.
Its important to capture the right data, store and 'Q curate it properly, and iterate through pilot experiments.
'R LISA 'S : How do you get the support to do this work and get it prioritized?
'T RUBEN 'U : It has to 'V show signs of success from the beginning.
You cant boil the 'W ocean and expect a company to pay for it to get that little one percentage li 'X along the way.
Aligning data projects with the companys North Star metric, 'Y such as customer happiness, rather than revenue, is essential.
'` One example of this process was my rst big patent at Amazon 18 years ago.
It 'a was a search relevancy feedback loop.
I implemented it over a weekend, tried 'b it on my desktop, then showed it to my boss and we both went, Wow, thats 'c amazing!
We didnt know what it was but it was materially better than any 'd other results at the time.
So, with his support, we spent another weekend on 'e it and then showed it to our VP who looked at it and said, Can we do this 'f again?
We led a patent, spent another couple of weeks working on it, and 'g then launched, and it was immediately credited with an important li in daily 'h revenue results.
And that was when my VP had to go to [Je] Bezos and say, 'i All those plans I just launched for the year, were gonna have to scramble them 'p because we just discovered something.
So that was a case of investing just 'q enough to decide if we should continue investing.
But its illustrative of the R R UBEN O O RTEGA 76 'r success of sponsorship stories.
You have to show something a little bit exciting 's using the data to get people on board.
't Examples of data that we know worked were every time we were able to use 'u the purchase signal at Amazon.
And Pinterest also kept looking for ways to 'v capture more signal.
e 'w joy of Pinterest is that it was a visual discovery engine, 'x and it grew up aer Amazon and Google, so it already had experimentation 'y built into the bones of the product.
' LISA ' : How do you engage people who are resistant to the benets of data and AI?
' RUBEN ' : Sharing ' success stories and demonstrating how data and AI can ' signicantly impact the companys goals are good starting points to generate ' energy and trust.
' Ive found a couple of eective strategies.
Firstly, teaching teams to tell compelling ' stories and linking that narrative to the customer as the hero (note: the hero ' is not the engineer or management!
), can make a big dierence.
For instance, ' I have an idea the data is telling me we have a certain ICP (Ideal Customer ' Prole) in a pharma company.
So, tell the story, using the vocabulary of the ' business, Heres the world as it is today, heres the crisis our customer is going ' through, heres how were going to x it, and heres the outcome for our hero ' the customer.
And heres a percentage li were going to see.
Personalizing ' the story is crucial because youre dealing with humans who want to look good ' in front of their bosses.
' Secondly, aligning data projects with the companys North Star metric, such ' as customer happiness, is essential.
Its worth noting that revenue is not a good ' North Star because its a lagging indicator so, for most data and AI projects ( you need to nd the leading indicators and see which ones best get you to that ( outcome.
For instance, I can tell you that $5 billion is better than $4 billion ( in revenue, but I also know the way to get there is by having ten thousand ( customers logging in versus ve.
R R UBEN O O RTEGA 77 ( LISA ( : What do you do when you go into a company and their data is a mess?
( RUBEN ( : e rst step ( is cleaning up the data by throwing out the garbage.
( e reason why generative AI has become all the rage right now is that theyve ( actually been pulling from high-quality data sources, but now theyre having ( to lter out sources that were too high quality and were causing problems ( with copyright.
( Depending on the type and importance of the data, dierent strategies can be ( applied.
Setting clear denitions, such as that of the customer, and raising the ( bar can improve data quality.
For instance, Pinterests denition of a customer ( used to be somebody whod come to the site in the last 90 days.
However, this ( denition proved to be ineective.
Consequently, we rened our denition ( to include only those individuals who not only visited the site at least three ( times within the past 90 days but also engaged in certain activities during ( their visits.
is temporarily dropped the number of customers they reported (!
but, with a higher bar for customers, we could demonstrate a more accurate (" leading indicator to revenue.
(# Identifying the key metrics aligned with the companys North Star and ensuring ($ accurate data collection, storage, and processing are crucial.
For instance, say (% you have a company that doesnt know when to sell their product.
ey need to (& look at the leading indicators from previous sales.
When you nd those seeds (' of data, you do a post-analysis and start making sure all the incoming data (( is correct and say, Okay, heres the golden three or ve metrics.
Once you () learn the discipline of getting those in place, you can start adding the 6th, 7th, (0 8th to test queries and make sure the data propagates through the system.
(1 When youve identied the key metrics you want to track in place, you need (2 to add the muscle within the organization, by adding more metrics maybe (3 one a month.
Gradually (4 building the necessary infrastructure and processes (5 in this way ensures a sustainable approach.
R R UBEN O O RTEGA 78 (6 LISA (7 : How do you foster eective teamwork?
(8 RUBEN (9 : Ownership (@ is vital.
Designating a leader who takes ownership of a (A problem for a specic time period, with the resources needed for a solution, (B can be eective.
Timeboxing the work also helps maintain focus.
(C Another crucial factor is aligning with the companys values, getting this right (D can lead to it becoming a scaling tool.
Having the CEO say, Hey, I just want (E to acknowledge this person taking up this problem.
He really exhibited the (F value of X.
Highlighting individuals in this way fosters a culture of teamwork (G and learning throughout the organization.
(H LISA (I : What lessons have you learned from situations that felt like failures at (P the time?
(Q RUBEN (R : In the early (S days of Amazon, we had projects like Amazon Cars (T a car referral search that ultimately failed because the customers didnt (U click through and, when they did, they were confused.
However, as we went (V through each iteration, the technology got better and faster, so each failure (W led to learnings that contributed to future successes.
(X e advice you give CEOs and founders is youll never have a perfect and (Y happy team.
Ive worked for 30 years in soware development and theres always (` somebody who is just learning the technology, bored of their work, getting (a a divorce, having a health problem, or a project manager who wants to be a (b soware engineer and vice versa.
But with clarity and eective management, (c you can always deliver fantastic things incrementally.
(d LISA (e : Whats your experience with change management?
(f RUBEN (g : It depends on (h the companys values and desired approach.
Iterative or (i a pull o the Band-Aid method can both work, provided youre consistent (p with what the end state is.
R R UBEN O O RTEGA 79 (q A Band-Aid example at Google was when we had to switch 300 people from (r working on search to working on something else.
ats when you get in front (s of the crowd and openly communicate the plans, reasons and expectations.
(t You tell everybody what youre doing, where youre going, whats happening, (u why its happening, and then you execute.
(v An example of an iterative approach at Pinterest was when we were developing (w a studio model for developing features.
We followed a pilot and evaluation (x approach, gradually rolling out changes and aligning with their collaborative (y values.
So, instead of having the whole front-end and back-end team do it, we ( piloted it with a small team of seven who were accountable for this one feature ( and execution, including whether they close it down, spin it up, or grow it.
( Dening a clear plan, seeking feedback, and iterating, helps navigate ( change eectively.
( LISA ( : What are your reections on the internal use of data and AI within ( companies?
What works well and what unlocks it?
( RUBEN ( : Marketing ( technology is a complex space because everybody has ( a dierent idea of what a strong signal looks like.
To eectively use data ( within companies, marketing and sales teams should adopt a disciplined and ( experimental culture.
( Implementing frameworks and tools like Hubspot and Copper are fantastic to ( assist in data-driven decision making but they need focus from the leadership ( of those organizations to be fully eective.
( Im an adviser to one company that does churn analysis and their tooling is ( great and they use AI so that you can take a look at how many contacts you had ( per month, etc.
e big signal about churn analysis is not when the customers ( contacting you, but when they stop, because theyre saying is product is ) not serving me.
So, if theyre not using the product and theyre not calling ) you, youre dead.
ats a churn.
ats one signal and this company does that ) pretty damn well because they use AI and all the magic of it.
R R UBEN O O RTEGA 80 ) LISA ) : What are you most excited about now in terms of using data and AI ) within companies?
) RUBEN ) : e ) increased discipline and knowledge around data utilization and ) AI are exciting.
ere used to be the phrase Soware is eating the world, but ) now its data thats eating the world and companies know they need to capture ) it, make it crisper, and leverage it for better decision-making.
e hype around ) generative AI is fantastic but it again highlights that data is the thing.
) I was the CTO of the Institute of Articial Intelligence for a short time to help ) them grow their teams, but one of their theses of development was How can we ) use the least amount of data to make an intuitive leap?
Making intuitive leaps ) with AI using smaller, high-quality datasets is an area of interest.
Its not just ) about ooding models with vast amounts of data but extracting meaningful ) signals from smaller datasets.
) Investors are also prioritizing companies with access to unique and valuable ) data.
I was talking to a VC recently who raised a $20 million fund focused on )!
generative AI and I said, What are you looking at?
And one of the rst things )" they led with was, Were looking for companies that have access to unique )# data.
Its becoming a core part of their investment theses.
Key Takeaways The power of unique data : In the venture capital world, access to unique data is increasingly becoming a core part of investment strategies.
Momentum with early wins : Initial results of AI projects should demonstrate early success and align with the companys key metric.
Showcasing AIs impact on company goals can build trust and enthusiasm.
Identify leading indicators for desired outcomes in data projects.
R R UBEN O O RTEGA 81 Storytelling and personalization : Teaching teams to tell compelling stories and linking that narrative to the customer as the hero can make a big dierence.
Experimentation : To gain buy-in, frame your AI project as an experiment, not a data issue.
Companies like Pinterest have shown that integrating disciplined experimentation into product development leads to innovative outcomes.
Even failures provide valuable insights for future success.
Handling messy data : To enhance data quality, establish clear denitions for core terms used within the business, for instance dening what is meant by customer.
is ensures consistency and accuracy in data interpretation and analysis.
Identify key metrics in line with the companys primary goal.
Ensure accurate data collection, storage, and processing.
: e best-assembled teams benet from a dedicated leader with ownership and resources for execution within a clear timeframe.
Ensure the project aligns with company values and recognize those who embody them to promote a teamwork culture.
Embrace continuous improvement with ongoing communication and adaptation.
Change management : Either iteration or a pull o the Band-Aid method can work, provided youre consistent with what the desired end state is.
Dening a clear plan, seeking feedback, and iterating, helps navigate change eectively.
83 8 Joshua R R ubin Principal AI Scientist at Fiddler AI )t We learned that the actual need in the enterprise extends )u beyond the explainability of the AI decisions to the broader )v story of operational consistency and risk management.
So, our )w focus shied from a purely technical perspective to one that )x encompasses standardization, centralization, and compliance.
)y Aer companies deploy their models into the real world, they ) require extensive measurement and performance tracking to ) ensure that things are working as intended.
LinkedIn: joshua-rubin ) JO s S HUA R R UBIN 84 ) Joshua Rubin ) is the Principal AI Scientist at Fiddler AI with a PhD in Physics ) from the University of Illinois.
As a scientist and machine learning practitioner, ) he applies his expertise to algorithm and product design, specializing in ) model explainability, semantic dri in unstructured data, and model-based ) evaluation for workows involving large language models.
Rubin champions ) clear, explainable AI, integrating this ethos into Fiddlers strategy and product ) suite.
Leading Fiddlers data science team, Rubin balances technical skill with ) strategic foresight, aligning product capabilities with client requirements.
His ) pragmatic approach ensures Fiddlers oerings not only meet current needs but ) also adapt to future demands.
In an industry prioritizing clarity and utility, ) Rubin focuses on delivering accountable, user-oriented AI solutions.
) LISA ) : Can you tell us about the background of Fiddler AI?
) JOSHUA 0 : Fiddler is 0 an enterprise AI observability company founded by 0 Krishna GadeandAmit Paka.
ey founded the company to address the 0 critical need for AI observabilityandexplainabilityin the eld of machine 0 learning and articial intelligence.
eir vision has led to the development 0 of a robust platform that empowers organizations to monitor, analyze, and 0 improve their AI models while ensuring transparency and accountability.
0 Before founding Fiddler, Gade held an engineering manager role atFacebook, 0 leading a team that built tools to enhance transparency in the products News 0 Feed personalization.
His experience at Facebook, especially aer the 2016 US 0 election, made him realize that the challenges related to the machine learning 0 workow such as monitoring, explaining, and maintaining models were not 0 unique to Facebook but were widespread.
is realization led to the foundation 0 of Fiddler in 2018with a vision to create a unied platform for managing 0 machine learning models, ensuring transparency, and 0 addressing issues of 0 fairness, accountability, and trust.
JO s S HUA R R UBIN 85 0 LISA 0 : What are the key oerings of Fiddler?
0 JOSHUA 0 : Fiddler 0!
provides an 0" AI Observability platform, enabling companies to 0# monitor, explain, analyze, and improve predictive and generative AI models.
We 0$ oer a full stack platform that detects issues as soon as models underperform, 0% measures and tracks ML and LLM metrics, provides rich insights into model 0& outcomes using human-readable explainable AI (XAI), diagnoses model 0' issues with root cause analysis, and assesses for fairness and bias.
rough 0( our responsible AI framework, we help companies build trust in AI.
0) LISA 00 : Can you explain the importance and challenges of explainability in AI 01 and how it impacts various stakeholders?
02 JOSHUA 03 : In the 04 realm of 05 AI and machine learning, explainability is a critical 06 component.
Its not uncommon for end users to question why theyre seeing 07 certain content in their newsfeeds or why specic ads are targeted at them.
ese 08 queries arise because of the highly personalized nature of these algorithms 09 tailoring content based on individual behaviors and preferences.
0@ e focus of explainability is to demystify the decisions made by these models.
0A is need for understanding isnt limited to end users; it extends to model 0B developers, technical overseers of AI behavior (MLOps roles), and executives 0C who need to be able to trace and justify these algorithmic decisions, a process 0D that becomes even more crucial for executives who must ensure these decisions 0E align with regulatory standards.
0F Consider the banking industry: heavily regulated and oen torn between 0G interest in the nancial benets of using sophisticated AI for credit underwriting 0H and the need to comply with transparency regulations.
Traditional numerical 0I models, such as credit scores, oer clear explanations for decisions, which can 0P be in contrast to the oen opaque nature of complex models, which poses a 0Q signicant challenge.
JO s S HUA R R UBIN 86 0R Another example is the use of an image classication or object detection model 0S in a model being used to evaluate insurance claims.
Explainability can provide 0T the why behind an AI recommendation, allowing a human domain expert to, 0U for example, tell the dierence between a fraudulent claim and a false positive 0V produced by background 0W imagery 0X captured under conditions outside of the 0Y models training experience.
0` LISA 0a : How do you apply explainability in situations of high speed and volume 0b where AI algorithms are making decisions?
0c JOSHUA 0d : Online 0e advertising is a good example of this scenario.
In this fast-paced 0f domain, algorithms make split-second decisions on ad placements based on a 0g myriad of user aspects.
ese rapid decisions, while impressive, are oen opaque.
0h So, Fiddler has a dual role to play: informing recipients (like those seeing an 0i ad or receiving a loan decision) about why theyre seeing what theyre seeing, 0p and providing an oine diagnostic review or incorporating human-in-the- 0q loop review, where specialists analyze algorithmic decisions, ensuring AIs 0r processes are auditable and can be rened to improve AI performance over time.
0s ese insights can inuence a companys strategic direction and compliance, 0t as articulating AIs decision-making is critical for maintaining regulatory 0u compliance, particularly in sectors like advertising where data usage and 0v consumer privacy are of utmost concern.
Fiddler workows can support both 0w real-time explanation and retrospective analysis.
0x LISA 0y : What type of customers do you sell to and what are their pain points?
0 JOSHUA 0 : Our ideal 0 customers range from hyperscale startups to enterprises 0 that have built applications on top of ML models or LLMs.
is includes banks 0 using lending or fraud models, and cloud-native commerce companies whose 0 algorithms determine the order of items displayed on a users screen.
JO s S HUA R R UBIN 87 0 Understanding the performance of these algorithms, especially when they 0 underperform or when the world changes in a way the model wasnt prepared 0 for, is crucial.
is concept is oen referred to as model dri.
0 Take, for example, a credit underwriting model at a bank; imagine if interest 0 rates were to change.
is could not only alter the distribution of household 0 incomes of loan applicants, causing the model to make unsafe extrapolations 0 from its training data, but it could also change the real relationship between 0 an applicant of a specic prole and their probability of successful repayment.
0 Such a change can cause the model to perform less accurately than at the time 0 of its training, potentially leading to lost revenue and risk.
Weve shown our 0 customers examples of reputational harm and unnecessary nancial losses, all 0 resulting from models making poor decisions due to unanticipated changes 0 in the world.
0 To mitigate these risks, we oer a pre-emptive solution that alerts model owners 1 when their models may be underperforming or when even subtle change in the 1 world might aect 1 their performance.
is allows for timely adjustments and 1 improvements, ensuring the models continue to serve their intended purpose 1 eectively and safely.
1 LISA 1 : Can you explain in more detail how Fiddler tracks model dri?
1 JOSHUA 1 : For structured 1 data, Fiddler detects model dri in distributions of 1 model inputs by periodically comparing histograms gathered for models in 1 production with those gathered from training with a variety of standard statistical 1 formulas.
For models that consume unstructured data like natural language 1 or images, Fiddler compares multidimensional distributions of embeddings 1 essentially numerical vector representations of this data.
If dri is identied, 1 the platform can notify model operators via email or other mechanisms and 1 provide a variety of tools for root-cause analysis.
JO s S HUA R R UBIN 88 1 LISA 1 : How would you say that Fiddler upholds the principle of responsible AI?
1 JOSHUA 1 : Fiddler was founded on our founders previous experiences by making 1!
model observability 1" tools accessible to a broad range of stakeholders within 1# the enterprise environment and throughout the AI lifecycle.
1$ As conversations with customers evolved, it became apparent that Fiddler 1% ts into and addresses challenges in the customers process and approach.
1& Once companies have built their models and have le the training zone to be 1' deployed into the real world, they need a lot more measurement and behavioral 1( performance tracking to make sure that things are working as intended.
1) You need to ask, how much measurement is needed?
What will happen if 10 they dont track or use AI observability?
How will it impact them?
What are 11 the implications if they were to use an observability tool?
How much more 12 condence would be instilled in them to push more models into production?
13 Fiddler has a responsible AI framework that is divided into four phases, where 14 each phase represents growth in the AI journey, and milestones are mapped 15 to business KPIs and ROI.
AI-forward organizations view this framework as 16 a way to rethink their orientation around change management as it relates to 17 people, process, and technology.
e principles of the framework also serve as 18 guidance for the enterprise to be an AI-forward company for the long term.
19 e overarching principle at Fiddler is to build trust into AI.
Whether its 1@ monitoring, explainability, analytics, governance, fairness, or bias; everything 1A that Fiddler can assist with is 1B underpinned by the principle of responsible AI.
1C LISA 1D : As you referred to very dierent sectors advertising, social media and 1E banking how important is industry domain expertise for your services to 1F benet an organization?
1G JOSHUA 1H : Our 1I tooling is general so that it can be applied across various domains.
1P is approach, to not target a particular vertical, was a business decision that 1Q Krishna and Amit made early on because they believed there was a substantial 1R need and enough commonality across dierent domains to make it viable.
JO s S HUA R R UBIN 89 1S A key component of this strategy is to assist human domain experts, who oen 1T arent the model developers.
For instance, we worked with a talent placement 1U company that had a model to evaluate resumes for suitability for roles where 1V other companies had job listings.
e goal was to aid career counselors in 1W matching the right people with the right roles.
1X In this scenario, the career counselor, who is a domain expert, is assisted by 1Y an algorithm that provides a recommendation.
If the algorithm can provide 1` more information about the guidance its providing, it can really help the 1a human domain expert.
For example, if the algorithm can explain why it thinks 1b a candidate is a good t for a role, or when a particular prediction may have 1c fallen into a blind spot where the model doesnt have much training, it gives 1d human domain experts extra insight into why the algorithm is making the 1e recommendations it does.
1f is essentially supercharges the human domain expert.
Humans have limitations, 1g such as fatigue from looking at numerous cases in a day.
Imagine, for example, 1h being a physician working in a hospital setting, and trying to maximize the 1i quality of care provided.
Because a computer never gets tired, it can consistently 1p provide important insights.
is reduces the likelihood of human error and 1q allows the human expert to work more eciently.
1r Furthermore, when the human expert discovers that the model is behaving in 1s a way thats not aligned with their expertise, it gives them a better ability to 1t communicate this to the model developer, who may not have the same level 1u of domain expertise.
is collaboration 1v between human experts and machine 1w learning models can lead to more eective outcomes.
1x LISA 1y : Based on the evolution of your product, how do you envision the future 1 of AI in enterprise environments, particularly in terms of real-time monitoring 1 and adaptability across diverse data types?
1 JOSHUA 1 : Its a 1 journey of discovery and adaptation.
Initially, we were all about 1 the technicalities, the nuts and bolts of AI models.
But as we delved deeper and 1 engaged with enterprises, it became evident that theres more to this narrative.
Its JO s S HUA R R UBIN 90 1 not just about how these models are craed or why they make certain decisions; 1 its also about their integration into the broader enterprise ecosystem.
We 1 learned that the actual need in the enterprise extends beyond the explainability 1 of the AI decisions to the broader story of operational consistency and risk 1 management.
So, our focus expanded to encompass workow standardization, 1 centralization, and compliance elements crucial in regulated industries 1 like banking.
1 Enterprises arent just looking for tools; theyre seeking solutions that streamline 1 processes, enhance eciency, and ensure compliance.
Our product scope has 1 changed in response to these needs from developer tooling to an enterprise 1 platform oering standardized observability layers.
is evolution came from 1 recognizing that enterprises oen require a standard platform and process 1 to avoid pitfalls of decentralized manual data entry and calculation, which 2 increases risk from human error and can lead to regulatory problems or worse.
2 e challenge isnt just in creating AI models but validating them in pre- 2 production and monitoring them in real-time production environments.
Its 2 about ensuring they continue performing optimally and adapting to changes 2 in data inputs and environmental variables.
e real need that emerged was 2 for repeatable tests and having a soware product that provides a standardized 2 observability layer to larger enterprises.
2 is understanding was accompanied by a shi to address not just simple 2 structured data, but also the more complex unstructured data types like natural 2 language and image especially with the advent of generative AI.
Real-time 2 monitoring becomes pivotal here; you cant wait for quarterly reviews to realize 2 something is amiss.
2 So yes, our journey has been one of evolution from focusing on algorithmic 2 explanations to addressing real-world enterprise needs around standardization, 2 compliance, real-time monitoring, and adaptability across diverse data types.
2 Its crucial for businesses to have real-time insights into their operations.
We 2 have to think about whos watching models in production and how oen they 2 need to be checked to ensure they are performing as initially designed.
JO s S HUA R R UBIN 91 2 For instance, if a camera or sensor on an assembly line starts to fail, its not 2 ideal to wait until the end of the quarter for a review.
By then, you might 2 discover that youve been producing faulty products for the last two months.
highlights the need for a model monitoring product that tracks performance 2" changes and data dri how the world is changing over time and diering 2# from the training data.
2$ is is where automation comes in, with alerting and dashboarding features.
2% A model operator can then monitor a portfolio of complex models, ensuring 2& theyre performing as 2' designed at any given moment.
Its not just about having 2( models that perform some business function, its about maintaining clarity 2) on what it means to put a model into service and ensuring theres a system in 20 place for continuous monitoring and adjustment.
21 is kind of value proposition is particularly appealing to our enterprise 22 customers.
ey appreciate the ability to promptly address issues, maintain 23 quality control, and optimize their operations.
Its all about staying proactive 24 rather than reactive.
Our enterprise buyers are looking for the kind of value 25 proposition that emphasizes immediate knowledge and action ensuring that any 26 disruptions in the production process are identied and addressed promptly.
27 LISA 28 : How does this new concept, as both a platform and a layer, t into a 29 companys existing tech stack?
2@ JOSHUA 2A : Fiddler provides a web interface where users can interact with charts, 2B dashboards, and 2C analytics, and programming interfaces for publishing data 2D from your model inference pipeline.
ere are programmatic hooks that get 2E stitched into the companys serving platform to publish to it.
Users can congure 2F alerts on dierent kinds of signals that might be indicative of a need for action.
2G ere are three main deployment options: $ $ % Soware as a Service (SaaS): In % this mode, we host the Fiddler platform on % the cloud and fully manage its maintenance and scaling.
JO s S HUA R R UBIN 92 % % % Virtual Private Cloud (VPC): Most % companies with privacy concerns have a % VPC with AWS, GCP, or Azure.
ese big hyperscale companies have a private % network within the envelope of a cloud provider.
All of their infrastructure % resides virtually within that, and we can deploy a version of Fiddler within & it.
It basically becomes a sort of standalone scalable system to which they & publish their data.
& & & Private data center: Enterprises & that have very strict security policies can & deploy Fiddler in an air-gapped setting.
2g e support demands of these three dierent deployment models are quite 2h dierent.
Its easy for us to support the SaaS platform as we can control scaling, 2i see where there are problems, and upgrade it with our own hands.
On the other 2p end of the spectrum, with the private data center deployment, we never get to 2q touch the keyboard and were lucky if we get a screen share.
2r Its important to note that we understand there are dierent customer deployment 2s requirements.
Some customers send us a few events per hour, but then we 2t have some that are ad tech or internet marketplace companies where it could 2u be millions of events per hour.
Building for scale was something that took a 2v real eort.
It wasnt the way the 2w original platform came out, but weve crossed 2x that hurdle and built something that really scales and is stable.
Its pretty 2y great, actually.
2 LISA 2 : Looking to the future of the company, what are your thoughts and what 2 excites you the most?
2 JOSHUA 2 : e future 2 of the company is incredibly promising, especially in 2 the realm of LLMs and LLMOps.
Last year, around October, we introduced 2 metrics that allow you to evaluate how your models are performing, including 2 their responsiveness, robustness, correctness, privacy, and safety.
You can even 2 assess if your models are hallucinating or producing toxic responses.
JO s S HUA R R UBIN 93 2 ese metrics weve developed are proving invaluable to companies.
As more 2 initiatives and pressures trickle down from the boardroom into the core 2 organization, its crucial to stay on the cutting edge.
If youre considering 2 deploying chatbots, for instance, you need to ensure theyre not toxic, abusive, 2 or hallucinating.
ey must be safe.
Weve only scratched the surface, and 2 theres so much more to come.
2 In addition to out-of-the-box metrics, companies can also measure specic 2 metrics for their unique use case by creating their own custom metric by 2 bringing in their own formula.
Say you recently launched a chatbot and want 2 to monitor the associated cost.
You can create a custom response cost metric 3 to track each OpenAI API call from the chatbot.
And a separate custom metric 3 to track the rejected responses generated by the chatbot responses that end 3 users have deemed poor or unhelpful.
By combining these two metrics in 3 Fiddler into a single formula, you can then calculate the true cost of using the 3 chatbot.
is approach allows you to gain a holistic understanding of the true 3 nancial impact and eectiveness of the chatbot.
3 AI observability is a massive eld with layers upon layers and is necessary to 3 ensure models and LLM and GenAI applications behave and perform in an 3 intended and healthy fashion.
At its core, its built on a vast foundation of data.
3 ere are countless 3 opportunities for growth, both downward into the data 3 and upward into new applications.
I cant even begin to imagine what well be 3 able to do two to ve years from now.
3 LISA 3 : What advice would you give non-technical business leaders on how they 3 might think about integrating AI into their companies?
How does this relate 3 back to your own company?
3 JOSHUA 3 : I oen tell 3 my team and others that every technology has its positives 3 and negatives.
Its all about how you use it.
Im proud that our company has 3!
always prioritized building trust in AI and ensuring that our outcomes are 3" safe and fair for consumers.
is commitment to social responsibility sets us 3# apart from many other tech companies.
JO s S HUA R R UBIN 94 3$ Any new technology can be intimidating.
eres a common fear that AI will 3% replace jobs.
AI will certainly change jobs.
ose who dont adapt could nd their 3& roles becoming obsolete.
is fear is not new; it was there when spreadsheets, 3' telephones, books, and newspapers were introduced.
Its all about how humans 3( react to change.
3) Businesses that choose not to embrace AI will nd that their competitors take 30 advantage of that and outpace them.
AI adoption is growing in organizations, 31 with more applications using AI for a variety of purposes.
Tooling, like we 32 provide for AI Observability, is crucial, whether thats for larger language 33 models or more traditional machine learning.
And while theres some overlap, 34 the two types of models are mostly complementary, solving dierent kinds of 35 problems.
Traditional machine learning continues to grow and remains critical 36 for a wide variety of predictive tasks.
37 When you have a company with one or two AI use cases and a small development 38 team, you can manage those things reasonably well.
However, as you adopt 39 more AI models and they function in increasingly mission-critical capacities, 3@ having tooling like Fiddler becomes essential.
It provides model governance, 3A protection against reputational harm and revenue loss, and allows you to adapt 3B rapidly to changing conditions in the world.
3C eres also the centralization consideration.
When you have a diverse model 3D portfolio and a large team of developers, centralizing both MLOps and 3E LLMOps in a platform like Fiddler provides operational eciency.
You dont 3F want thousands of people in your 3G organization manually rolling up statistics 3H in Excel spreadsheets.
You want a centralized algorithm thats been vetted.
3I LISA 3P : Can you talk through a company that went through this standardization, 3Q particularly in observability, and scaling challenge?
How did you work with them?
3R JOSHUA 3S : Certainly.
Lets 3T discuss Tide, a leading UK business nancial platform.
3U e complexity of the company was increasing, so they came to us for this type 3V of solution.
Tide recognized the urgent need to scale 3W their machine learning (ML) 3X solutions to oer automated bookkeeping and integrated invoicing for small JO s S HUA R R UBIN 95 3Y businesses without a dedicated nance function.
However, the maintenance 3` of production ML models was a signicant bottleneck, preventing their data 3a science team from pursuing new business opportunities.
6 Business Challenge 3c Tides data science team was inundated with the task of troubleshooting model 3d performance issues.
Due to a lack of standardization, each team member was 3e using a dierent monitoring tool, leading to inconsistent views on model 3f performance and creating decision-making silos across data science, machine 3g learning, and business teams.
6 Context-dependent issues 6 7 7 Reactive model monitoring 7 : e teams model monitoring approach was so 7 reactive that issues would go unnoticed until they became critical, leading 7 to a longer mean time to detect concept or data dri, challenging root cause 7 analysis, and complex model explainability.
7 7 7 Lack of standardization 7 : With each team using their own tools, there was 8 no unied perspective on model health, which aected coherent decision- 8 making and innovation.
8 8 8 Resource misallocation 8 : Data scientists spent excessive time managing scripts 8 for troubleshooting rather than innovating and unlocking new business avenues.
8 Approach 3 To address these 3 challenges, Tides Head of Data Science, Suryanarayana 3 Ambatipudi, recognized the need for an enterprise-grade model monitoring 3 tool that could bring together all the teams on a unied platform, streamline 3 processes, and enable scalability in line with the companys growth strategy.
3 Aer considering the development of an in-house tool, Tide opted to buy an 3 external solution for cost-eectiveness and standard adherence.
Fiddler was JO s S HUA R R UBIN 96 3 chosen as the AI observability platform to meet their needs for a robust and 3 exible MLOps framework.
9 Results and Impact 3 e implementation of Fiddler as Tides AI Observability platform led to 3 substantial improvements in both operational eciency and strategic focus.
4 Impacts included: @ @ @ Higher productivity: Tides data science team experienced a signicant @ increase in productivity.
By utilizing Fiddler, the team no longer needed to @ dedicate extensive periods to monitoring and troubleshooting performance @ issues, which freed up time for value-adding activities.
@ @ @ Cost eciency: e automated performance tracking capabilities led to a A reduction in both infrastructure and maintenance costs, marking a direct A cost saving for Tide.
A A A Strategic focus: e team could now rapidly identify and resolve issues A impacting the business.
is agility enhanced their ability to provide swi A post-mortem analyses, which is crucial for continuous improvement and A risk mitigation.
A A B Unied performance metrics: A unied view of model performance metrics, B ensured consistency in the evaluation and understanding of ML models B across the organization.
B B B Improved collaboration: e improved collaboration between the data science B and business teams facilitated more informed decision-making and reinforced B the role of data science as a pivotal contributor to Tides business strategy.
4( ese results 4) underscore Tides commitment to leveraging cutting-edge technology 40 to enhance their operational eciency and maintain their position as the UKs 41 leading business nancial platform.
JO s S HUA R R UBIN 97 C Fiddlers AI observability platform has enabled us to shi our C conversation from merely being model providers to becoming C condent decision-makers, aligned with business strategies and C insights.
is has transformed how we operate, and we anticipate C a signicant positive impact on our business metrics.
C Suryanarayana Ambatipudi, Head of Data Science at Tide C Future Plans 49 Tide aims to integrate explainable AI within their framework to provide 4@ operational insights, thereby 4A reducing the 4B mean-time-to-resolve (MTTR) 4C business metrics and aligning model outcomes with business decisions.
D Key Takeaways D D D Mitigating risk through responsible AI D : Building trust in AI through responsible D E practices is no longer optional.
It sets companies apart, safeguards against E reputational risk, and protects against revenue loss.
E E E The E E importance of standardization and observability E : Standardization E and E observability are crucial principles in responsible AI.
ese practices are F essential for enterprises when building, validating, and deploying models F into production.
F F F Integrating AI into enterprise environments F : Enterprise AI goes beyond F model F creation and decision-making to integration into existing systems.
F is prioritizes explainability, operational consistency and risk management, F standardization, and centralization.
G G G Transitioning to AI platforms G : Enterprises are transitioning from developer G G tooling to an enterprise platform that standardizes observability layers.
is G allows for simplied compliance and real-time monitoring of the AI model G performance for issue detection.
JO s S HUA R R UBIN 98 G G H Pre-empting model drift H : When algorithms underperform or the world H changes in a H way the model wasnt prepared for, this model dri can lead H to lost revenue and pose risks.
ese can be caused by a number of factors, H including economic shis, new customer behaviors, and seasonal variations.
H is can lead to less accurate predictions because the model is trying to apply H outdated rules to a new situation.
To mitigate these risks, consider a preemptive H solution that alerts owners, so they can make proactive adjustments and H ensure ongoing optimal model eectiveness.
99 I 9 I N N adine T T homson I I I GroupM (WPP) 4 Recently, I was looking at a product that can take a picture 4 and modify the background based on user commands, while 4 avoiding copyright issues.
is is something that would 4 usually take a long time and, although it still requires some 4 tweaking from a brilliant creative to pull it all together, the 5 speed of change is both daunting and exhilarating.
P LinkedIn: P thomsonnadine 5 N N ADINE T T HOM s S ON 100 5 Nadine Thomson 5 is the Global Chief Technology Ocer at GroupM, the worlds 5 leading media investment company.
She has helmed B2B and B2C international 5 transformation programs across the media, retail, insurance, professional 5 services, and entertainment sectors, including leading technology for Conde 5 Nast International and Vue Cinema, as well as advising News UK and Capita 5 on technology strategy.
5 LISA 5 : Could you tell us a bit about your journey in the technology and data space?
5 NADINE 5 : I currently 5 serve as the Group CTO at GroupM, the media investment 5 division of WPP.
My primary responsibility is to unify the technology across 5 the holding companies within GroupM, put our money behind the best bets, 5 and drive innovation.
As you become more senior in technology, the job is 5 oen less about dealing with technology challenges and more about addressing 5 people issues.
My journey in technology started in quite an unorthodox way as I initially went 5" to university to be a vet but then swapped to a computer science degree.
Since 5# then, Ive worked in a range of organizations including a stint in publishing 5$ with Conde Nast, then News UK, cinema, and oil and gas insurance.
5% Aside from my current role at GroupM, Im also a non-executive director at 5& Visit England, a position that helps me broaden my perspective on business 5' and its key considerations.
5( Although seemingly diverse, in the various roles Ive held, data and AI have 5) become an increasingly signicant focus.
Whether working alongside or 50 sometimes leading chief data 51 ocers, I nd myself continually integrating 52 and strategizing around AI as it is integral to all of our products.
N N ADINE T T HOM s S ON 101 53 LISA 54 : Could you delve a bit deeper into your approach to data and AI when 55 joining a new organization?
What has been the problem that youre trying to 56 solve and how did you get the sponsorship to move that forward?
57 NADINE 58 : Whenever 59 I join a new organization, I dont necessarily come in thinking 5@ What is the tech or data challenge?
but instead I focus on understanding the 5A business operating model and strategic priorities.
I ask, Whats important for 5B the business?
Whats their strategy now and in the short and long term?
How 5C are technology and data enabling the business vision, contributing to strategic 5D outcomes, and potentially hindering progress?
For instance, in my role in 5E the cinema industry, I analyzed consumer data and used it to drive revenue.
5F I approach it with two lenses, examining what the business is doing with 5G data and technology to both drive revenue and operate eciently.
My goal is 5H to identify current challenges and potential opportunities that the company 5I can capitalize on.
Looking again at an example from my cinema experience, I 5P looked at labor optimization and movie scheduling, using data to understand 5Q audience demographics and preferences.
For example, you schedule more 5R Bollywood movies in Birmingham than you would schedule in other areas 5S due to the higher Indian population.
Knowing the data around demographics 5T in specic areas is invaluable there.
5U LISA 5V : How did you overcome challenges and get businesses started on their 5W tech and AI journey?
5X NADINE 5Y : My 5` approach involves understanding the business model, vision, and 5a priorities and mapping stakeholders responsibilities.
With this understanding, 5b I take stakeholders on a journey, showing them how technology and AI could 5c drive more revenue and impact the business.
e method of driving this change 5d depends on the organization 5e and specic program.
N N ADINE T T HOM s S ON 102 5f LISA 5g : Did you drive it through the business leaders or the technology function?
5h NADINE 5i : It diers 5p depending on the organization and the program.
So, for 5q example in the cinema industry, we brought in data and technology to optimize 5r labor, an initiative that the business had already prioritized.
As well as collecting 5s the data we looked at some external factors too and brought them together 5t with the scheduling of movies and labor.
5u We looked at what we needed to put in place for ticketless cinema, which 5v competitors were starting to do (this was 7 or 8 years ago), and used that to 5w drive eciencies within the business and also to drive more sales because our 5x research showed that people were more likely to go to a movie if they booked 5y well in advance rather than deciding an hour before.
Presenting this to the 5 executive team helped drive the data and tech solutions.
5 LISA 5 : Did you have the skill sets already in your team or did you have to go 5 and recruit them or use external teams to help you?
5 NADINE 5 : Again, this 5 varies by organization and team.
In my role with the 5 cinema business, I partnered with external organizations to complement the 5 existing capabilities, as the team might understand the business operations and 5 data sources but lacked the skills to synthesize data or build specic solutions.
5 Whereas when I have worked in media, they denitely had the skill set in 5 their organizations.
5 LISA 5 : What are the main obstacles you encounter?
5 NADINE 5 : In the age of data abundance, I nd that data quality and consolidation 5 are among the biggest 5 challenges.
With storage solutions like the cloud making 5 storage so easy, people now tend to collect everything.
Businesses oen have 5 huge amounts of data but arent very skilled at bringing it together cohesively, 6 so one of the key challenges is consolidation.
is is exacerbated when dierent N N ADINE T T HOM s S ON 103 6 business areas label data dierently.
e issue extends from poor data quality 6 due to human error during data entry to joining disparate data together.
You 6 can only realize the potential value of enormous amounts of data when you 6 have a brilliant modeling system that can work across all that 6 data and pull 6 something meaningful together.
6 LISA 6 : Could you share examples of how youve implemented a data product 6 within a business and the impact it had?
6 NADINE 6 : When I worked 6 in media, we developed a product that analyzes client 6 advertisements.
It suggests tweaks, such as moving a logo from the top le 6 to the bottom right, to potentially increase the attention the ad receives.
Its 6 an AI-backed system, drawing on past ad performance data and identifying 6 patterns.
However, the challenge is that AI suggestions dont always align with 6 real-world considerations.
For example, if the AI suggests including only a male 6 gure in a soccer shoe ad because historically it attracts more clicks, we may 6 not follow that due to other factors.
So, while AI is an integral part of what we 6 do, it doesnt take over entire processes or products.
LISA 6" : What are your thoughts on the current state and future of AI?
6# NADINE 6$ : Although 6% AI is commanding a great deal of attention now that it has 6& a user interface with ChatGPT, it is still early in deployment within businesses.
6' What people claimed AI could do years ago is just becoming feasible now as its 6( extraordinary capabilities usually need a few years to become available at scale.
6) However, things are evolving rapidly, especially as AI solutions like ChatGPT 60 have captured the imagination and are encouraging organizations to lean in, 61 propelling AIs development.
N N ADINE T T HOM s S ON 104 62 LISA 63 : What, in your opinion, are important considerations when working 64 with AI?
65 NADINE 66 : To me, the 67 most crucial aspect is looking at human moderation.
68 Regardless of how youre incorporating AI, whether as part of a tool or in a 69 predictive model, its important to apply human judgment, like that example 6@ I gave of the football boot ad.
AI might provide suggestions based on ROI or 6A past data, but theyre not the only factors you make a decision on.
AI lacks the 6B ability to consider broader context or evolving cultural nuances.
6C For instance, in a project we conducted with a cinema chain, we used AI to model 6D potential audiences for lms based on past performances.
e AI struggled 6E when we introduced new elements, like a movie with a female or black lead.
6F ere was limited historical data for such cases, which led to the AI potentially 6G underestimating their potential success.
e AI couldnt predict their success 6H because it didnt have past data to draw upon.
While the AI wasnt biased in a 6I malicious sense, it could not consider the data in a contextual way, taking into 6P account the global, political, and cultural shis that could inuence the lms 6Q success.
is is a limitation of AI that we must keep in 6R mind.
It underscores 6S the importance of human moderation to supplement AIs outputs.
6T LISA 6U : How long does it typically take to get started on a program such as cinema 6V insights and generate something impactful for the business?
6W NADINE 6X : It largely 6Y depends 6` on the infrastructure already in place within the 6a organization.
If programs are underway, and signicant work has been done 6b to consolidate data across the organization, then things will move faster.
6c When introducing something new, particularly in AI, the quality of the existing 6d data is crucial.
A large portion of the eort is spent behind the scenes, cleaning 6e data and organizing it in a way that allows us to implement a model and 6f extract meaningful insights, like matching up audiences correctly in that 6g media planning example I gave earlier.
N N ADINE T T HOM s S ON 105 6h In fact, Id probably say that about 80% of the eort is dedicated to these 6i seemingly mundane, yet essential admin and structuring-type tasks, while only 6p 20% goes into implementing clever technology.
ere are some new technologies 6q you can layer on top, which do some of this type of admin work for you, but 6r its not plug and play by any means.
6s LISA 6t : What do you consider one of the most worthwhile inputs or interventions 6u youve had during a data initiative?
6v NADINE 6w : For me, the 6x key is educating people to understand the signicance of 6y initial manual data entry and the subsequent joining of data to extract meaningful 6 insights.
Its crucial to recognize that data must come from somewhere and must 6 be connected correctly to be useful.
Getting that understood and bought into 6 by an executive team early on is crucial otherwise they just dont understand 6 why things take so long.
6 6 LISA 6 : Can you share an instance of apparent failure that has equipped you to 6 use data more eectively?
Is there anything you would have done dierently?
6 NADINE 6 : I came 6 into an organization a couple of years ago who were heavily 6 involved in business intelligence reporting, but the business didnt understand 6 why it took six months to deliver results.
Some of that was due to the eciency 6 and structure of the team but they were also dealing with data coming in from 6 so many dierent sources and in lots of dierent formats, which was a mess 6 and consumed a lot of time.
6 e advent of AI and data modeling has made data matching easier.
However, 6 it is important to verify that AI has correctly matched the data to your business 6 requirements.
e executives in this case and many others think data is an 6 instantaneous solution put in data, hit a button, and a report pops out when 7 actually, theres about three months of work that needs to go on before you 7 can actually hit that button.
N N ADINE T T HOM s S ON 106 7 Over the years, Ive prioritized securing sponsorship to ensure you have the 7 support to see you through the entire program.
e executives need to clearly 7 understand that a lot of groundwork happens before the report is generated.
7 LISA 7 : What are you currently most excited about in AI?
7 NADINE 7 : Im excited by AIs 7 potential to expedite processes by automating the 7 more mundane tasks of data joining.
Generative AI, for instance, is astounding.
7 Recently, I was looking at a product that can take a picture and modify the 7 background based on user commands, while avoiding copyright issues.
is 7 is something that would usually take a long time and, although it still requires 7 some tweaking from a brilliant creative to pull it all together, the speed of 7 change is both daunting and exhilarating.
7 LISA 7 : Is there anything else youd like to mention for business leaders?
7 NADINE 7 : Id advise 7 board members to take more interest in data and AI.
Boards predominantly recruit individuals with a nance background, which is 7" understandable but lacks balance given the rapid rate of technological change.
7# Boards should consider whether they have the necessary skills and support to 7$ guide them on data usage and AI strategy.
ey need to think not only about 7% using data and tech but also about understanding it.
r Key Takeaways r r r Vision-driven change for value s : Understand the business operating model s and strategic priorities, and how data and technology can enable them.
Have s a clear vision of how data and technology can add value to the business, both s in terms of generating revenue and improving eciency.
N N ADINE T T HOM s S ON 107 s s s Adaptive engagement strategies s : Its crucial to engage with stakeholders s across the organization, showcasing how technology and AI can inuence s business outcomes with relevant examples.
e approach should be exible t and adaptable, selecting the optimal method of instigating change based on t the organization and specic program, and utilizing internal capabilities or t external partnerships as necessary.
t t t Data quality and consolidation challenges t : Data quality and consolidation t are major challenges for businesses that have abundant data but lack the skills t to integrate it coherently.
Data quality issues can arise from human error, t inconsistent labeling, or disparate sources, which can aect the accuracy and u reliability of analysis and insights.
AI enhances data products by optimizing u ads, but it may overlook real-world factors like ethical or societal implications.
u While AI improves processes, it doesnt replace human judgment or creativity.
u A balanced approach combining AI and human expertise is essential.
u u u Human moderation and AI limitations u : Human judgment is essential for u evaluating AI suggestions, as AI may not account for broader context or u evolving cultural nuances that aect human decisions and preferences.
AI v may have diculty predicting the success of movies with female or black v leads, due to limited historical data and lack of contextual awareness of the v changing social and cultural landscape.
AI is not biased or malicious, but it v has a limitation that we must acknowledge and address by providing more v diverse and representative data and feedback.
v v v Data infrastructure and quality v : e time it takes to start a data program v depends on the existing data infrastructures quality and organization, which is w vital for new data products, especially in AI.
Much eort is spent on cleaning w and organizing data to facilitate model implementation and extraction of w meaningful insights.
Data education and stakeholder buy-in are essential w for getting people to understand the importance of accurate and consistent w initial manual data entry and later data integration for value extraction.
w Securing early executive support for the data program is essential for aligning w expectations on timelines and anticipated benets.
N N ADINE T T HOM s S ON 108 w w w AI on boards x : Data and AI are transforming the business world, creating new x possibilities and challenges for organizations.
Board members need to be more x interested and involved in these areas, as they have strategic implications for x the future of their organizations.
However, many boards lack balance and x diversity in their composition, as they tend to recruit individuals with a nance x background.
is may limit their ability to understand and guide the data x usage and AI strategy of their organizations.
Boards should consider whether x they have the necessary skills and support to make informed decisions on x these matters and seek external or internal expertise if needed.
109 x 10 y Sarvarth M M isra y Co-Founder and CEO of ContractPodAi 7 Ive oen been questioned about the logic of pursuing a law 7 degree before creating a tech product.
But aer seven or 7 eight years of doing this work, I realize the value of my legal 7 domain experience.
With AI technology becoming increasingly 7 accessible, domain expertise, in many ways, will be the 7 dierentiator in the coming decade.
y LinkedIn: y sarvarth-misra-69869953 8 SARVARTH M M I s S RA 110 8 Sarvarth Misra 8 is a prominent thought leader, innovator, and entrepreneur in the 8 legal sector.
He is a Co-Founder and CEO of ContractPodAi, a market-leading 8 legal technology business at the forefront of AI-driven solutions.
Sarvarth was 8 named a Champion of Generative AI Innovation by the Financial Times in 2023.
8 With a background as a corporate and commercial lawyer, he has extensive 8 experience in the legal technology and services sector and has been instrumental 8 in the development, strategy, and growth of ContractPodAi.
Leading its design, 8 development, and all new innovation initiatives, Sarvarth has also spearheaded 8 its commercialization strategy and new market routes.
His previous work in 8 private practice involved working with leading law rms in Asia, focusing on 8 M&A (Mergers and Acquisitions), capital markets, corporate restructuring 8 transactions, and cross-border joint venture agreements in the insurance, IT, 8 and nancial sectors.
An alumnus of the University of Oxford, Sarvarth is a 8 prominent speaker at conferences on legal technology and services and has 8 written on diverse topics such as AI adoption, the future of the legal profession, 8 the impact of generative AI, company agility, and risk management.
8 LISA 8 : What were the motivations behind the creation of ContractPodAi and 8 what challenges were faced during its development and launch?
SARVARTH 8" : With a 8# background 8$ in commercial law as a corporate M&A lawyer, 8% not technology, Ive spent a signicant proportion of my career reviewing, 8& draing, and negotiating contracts.
My co-founder, Robert Glennie, has a 8' similar background managing a global consortium of law rms for KPMG.
Our 8( experiences made it clear that the existing systems for contract management, 8) which oen focus on either buy-side or sell-side contracting, are not t for 80 purpose.
is le the lawyers in the middle frustrated.
We noticed that legal 81 functions were buying technology to help manage contracts but were still 82 dissatised.
e legal system has to innovate in a modular way, so you have 83 people buying dierent parts from one place, something for the repository, 84 something for the workow.
Many of these companies werent managing 85 contracts eectively with next to no digitalization, which was surprising given SARVARTH M M I s S RA 111 86 the size of some of the customer bases.
Contracts were scattered across various 87 repositories, even on someones desktop.
ere was no single source of truth.
88 So, for instance, when lawyers started contract litigation, it was oen the rst 89 time they were hunting through shared drives or emails to nd contracts.
e 8@ number of times people missed out on price escalations or renewals, which had 8A signicant top-line and bottom-line impacts on businesses, was substantial.
8B We thought, hang on, were the guys building these contract management 8C processes across enterprises that did not meet the needs of the business, so 8D lets address that.
Asking our own customer base as private practice lawyers, 8E large GCs (general counsels) told us, You guys understand what we do.
You 8F understand contracts.
You know how the process works in an organization.
8G You know how broken this market space is.
Have you ever thought of building 8H an end-to-end platform?
8I Our view was that a signicant majority of the market needed a solution to 8P help them in their digital transformation journey.
So, Robert Glennie and I 8Q put our heads together and 8R launched 8S ContractPodAi in late 2012, an end-to- 8T end AI-based contract lifecycle management system to make contract lifecycle 8U management fast, easy, and intelligent.
8V LISA 8W : Who is your core customer?
8X SARVARTH 8Y : Our customers 8` are every user in an enterprise who touches a 8a contract in its lifecycle.
at said, we pride ourselves in focusing on championing 8b legal departments to drive transformation in contract lifecycle management.
8c Our system covers everything from how the business requests for contract 8d reviews or new contracts, to how you assemble and author your high-volume, 8e low-complexity contracts.
It also includes using articial 8f intelligence for third- 8g party contract review and signature management.
SARVARTH M M I s S RA 114 91 LISA 92 : Could you share your personal journey in AI and the development of 93 this platform, especially from the perspective of a domain expert rather than 94 technology?
95 SARVARTH 96 : We were 97 pioneers in contract management, even when it wasnt 98 a trend, and embraced the term AI in our brand name in 2015.
ere are two 99 main aspects to our approach.
First, the power of workow automation, which 9@ streamlines the process.
Second, the use of articial intelligence to eliminate 9A manual data entry from contract management.
is allows us to capture a 9B wealth of data, which can then be transformed into valuable insights.
9C We recognized the potential of these technologies early on, and in 2015, we 9D were among the rst to partner with IBM Watson.
We initially focused on 9E three use cases.
9F We leveraged AI for tasks like data entry, which were traditionally done manually 9G by non-lawyers.
9H From there, we delved into the concept of cognitive deep search, especially 9I in the context of contracts.
For instance, if youre a lawyer going through 9P an M&A, you have thousands of contracts and you need a way to search for 9Q specic provisions across your repository.
is became a major use case for us.
9R Additionally, when it comes to contract review, governance, risk, and compliance, 9S theres a need to review third-party contracts consistently, which has been 9T a gap in the market.
is was another signicant use case for us.
We were 9U probably ahead of our time in 9V doing this, but as technology improved, the 9W market caught up.
9X LISA 9Y : What are your observations on the expectations of customers for results?
9` SARVARTH 9a : Our journey 9b with these use cases and applied AI solutions over 9c the past ve years has had a profound impact.
We were using natural language 9d processing and machine learning, which are great, but legal documents are 9e complex and unstructured, so showing value to customers typically takes 9f time.
Its a journey, not an overnight sensation.
e increasing speed of AI SARVARTH M M I s S RA 115 9g innovations, including ChatGPT Large Language Models (LLMs), has won 9h many fans but also created an impatient mentality: if it doesnt yield something 9i immediately, its not worth anything.
Sure, there are shortcuts and progress on 9p the way, but AI needs time and investment to turn it into something viable for 9q an industry.
Customers who understand and accept that this transformation is 9r always going to be a journey have aligned their expectations.
However, some 9s customers, who are not used to the crawl, walk, run journey, expect immediate 9t results and lose patience.
9u So, our experience with AI has been the sum of seven years of successes and 9v failures.
Today, the LLMs are constantly improving.
Add to that, our subject 9w market expertise and deep engineering skills allow us to solve complex legal 9x use cases and that gets us excited about what the future holds.
9y LISA 9 : What technology did you use to build your platform?
9 SARVARTH 9 : Our 9 technology stack was built on Microso Azure.
is is because 9 many of our products, including features like redlining, are built as plugins 9 for Word.
As lawyers ourselves, we knew how hard it is to get lawyers out of 9 Word, so we decided to develop within the Microso ecosystem.
is was a 9 tough journey, but it eventually paid o as you get more stickiness because the 9 lawyers will actually start using your soware in many ways.
9 From the outset, in 2014, we were cloud-rst.
Our model is based on soware 9 as a service (SaaS), with a license subscription fee model.
Weve fully integrated 9 signature partners, like DocuSign, into our workow.
But the core build, workow, 9 and AI are all 9 our own.
is blend of Microso tech and our proprietary 9 technology has been instrumental in our success.
SARVARTH M M I s S RA 116 9 LISA 9 : Could you clarify how IBMs Watson was integrated into your tech architecture?
9 SARVARTH 9 : In 2015, we 9 built our foundational model for contract management @ with Watson.
We then trained our own customized model in much more @ detail with our customers feedback and our own data science team.
is @ investment in the data science team was important.
Of course, our bandwidth @ of technology partners has expanded to Google, Microso, OpenAI, and @ Anthropic to name a few.
@ LISA @ : Did you nd it challenging to recruit data scientists?
@ SARVARTH @ : A good @ data scientist is always hard to recruit.
However, we found @ our edge in the ability to attract what we term legal engineers individuals with @ a strong legal foundation who also possess a deep understanding of technology.
@ Legal engineers and legal designers working in tandem is now a common sight, @ as the need for subject matter expertise is undeniable.
It was this combination @ that paved the way for our success in building our own models and more, as @ we went through this journey.
Contractual language is a bit complex to gure @ out so you need expertise in many ways.
@ LISA @ : How did you ensure the protection and ring fencing of intellectual @ property?
I can envision that the legal department of one enterprise would not @ want its contracts to be confused with those of another.
How was this issue of @!
containment addressed and resolved and incorporated into your architecture?
@" SARVARTH @# : Given our @$ customer base, from Day 1 we dierentiated between @% what we call embedded AI versus purely generative AI.
With the embedded AI @& techniques, AI is being used to only focus on the embedded data of the customer @' versus publicly available internet data.
So AI is being used to understand each @( individual customers data in a secure environment and using engineering @) techniques like RAG, reinforced learning and prompt engineering to build @0 customer-centric models.
Our infrastructure layer, powered by dedicated compute @1 resources, ensures that no customer data is shared for training public models.
SARVARTH M M I s S RA 117 @2 Over time, trends from our customer-centric models became learnings that @3 we could incorporate into our own proprietary models.
@4 LISA @5 : What has been the reaction of lawyers to generative AI, I suspect they @6 were both excited and terried about it?
@7 SARVARTH @8 : Youre @9 absolutely right.
My peers urged me to explore GPT in @@ its very early days and I very quickly realized that this is dierent.
But I also @A realized that these models by themselves will not be able to solve legal use @B cases deep domain expertise and deep engineering will be needed to show @C results at the enterprise level.
@D We knew this would have a transformative impact and that we had to adjust our @E product roadmap.
We doubled our eorts over the next few weeks.
Fortunately, @F our previous eight years of AI and enterprise experience gave us an edge.
It @G was clear to me that language models would have scalability and therefore @H deployment was easier.
@I When we saw our competitors using it, we knew we were ahead.
We had already @P tackled the challenges they were just beginning to face.
One of the things we @Q were very clear about from day one was to be proactive adopters of AI, not @R reactive.
e decision I instinctively made for the company was to take the @S lead in integrating GPT as an AI-led company, understanding that one size @T wouldnt t all given the multiple legal use cases.
@U We knew integrating a GPT model wouldnt be a quick x.
It would require @V deep engineering and be painful, but it would be worth it.
Recognizing that @W lawyers were initially experimenting with GPT from a consumer, non-legal @X professional perspective, we understood that there would be skepticism and @Y concern regarding risks.
We needed to do this integration in the right way.
@` Legal councils dont want Google or Bing answers; they want insights from their @a own data.
So, we embedded these models into our system and quickly realized @b that OpenAIs standalone API wasnt equipped for this.
It couldnt handle large @c volumes of data.
So, we undertook a massive engineering eort, including SARVARTH M M I s S RA 118 @d our own dedicated compute for processing, to optimize output performance @e and security for our clients.
We knew we needed this infrastructure, despite @f the investment.
In hindsight, moving @g with conviction was one of the better @h decisions Ive made.
@i LISA @p : How did you work with OpenAI and what impact did this have on @q infrastructure costs?
@r SARVARTH @s : We worked @t directly with OpenAI.
e dedicated compute was @u pricey, but it was a necessary step for serving enterprise customers because we @v didnt want our customers to be just another public API.
at model might work @w for B2C or consumer apps, but not for our clientele.
Early on, we recognized @x that infrastructure costs would accumulate over time.
But thats a part of the @y journey weve embarked on.
Its all about the long game.
@ LISA @ : Have you maintained your partnership with OpenAI, or are you considering @ collaborations with Gemini or other conversational AI models?
@ SARVARTH @ : Weve @ multiple AI strategies, including with OpenAI, Anthropic @ and Google.
Weve also tested some very good open source models that we @ have been able to train for dierent legal use cases.
Given our experience with @ AI in the past several years, our strategy was very clear that one size doesnt @ t all even with the dierent complexity of legal use cases, we will need to @ use dierent models and engineering techniques to deliver the best end result @ to our customers.
Despite the strengths of these models, we realized the need @ for a multiple-language model strategy to cater to the depth and breadth of @ our solutions.
@ We made a larger investment in enterprise cloud infrastructure than most, @ which we believe was the right thing to do.
is in many ways signied our @ moment to lead, aligning with the businesss purpose and mission focused on AI.
SARVARTH M M I s S RA 119 @ LISA @ : How did you convince lawyers of the merits of GenAI and integrate it @ into your platform?
A SARVARTH A : Ive trained A as a lawyer, so I understand the legal persona of being A risk averse.
Skepticism has always been a challenge but seeing their peers A embrace change and discussions with CEOs and boards pushing for operational A excellence made a dierence.
We leveraged our experience in AI to give an A honest view to our customers about what can and cant be done.
Managing A expectations is very important and we continue to invest in educating people A about the possibilities and limitations.
A When the CEOs of enterprises started to prioritize GenAI and started asking A their GCs how they would deploy it in the next 12 months, this shied the A momentum and marked a fundamental change in priorities.
We were getting A approached by GCs saying, My CEO wants me to use GenAI.
A To integrate it successfully into our platform, weve considered how GCs might A use AI, given that many CEOs are keen on adopting it but oen without a clear A application in mind.
Weve modularized our day-to-day operations, building A modules for tasks like draing and redlining.
Transactional work and guidance A are key examples.
We estimate that for most GCs, these tasks constitute 70% A of their daily work.
We believe in leading with a human touch, as were not A yet at a stage where we can fully rely on AI as an autopilot technology.
Weve A strategically positioned our AI to handle tasks that lawyers typically dont enjoy, A!
like answering routine business queries or reading contracts.
If some of this A" work can be handled more eciently with the help of technology, it could lead A# to signicant savings.
is is our vision for the future of legal work with AI.
A$ At the end of last year, we won an important industry deal with Integreon, a A% provider of outsourced legal and business solutions.
ey will use our GenAI A& legal platform Leah to transform and reimagine the delivery model of some of A' their own legal service delivery lines.
We have signed a similar global enterprise A( deal with a leading Big 4 consulting rm as part of their legal practice.
Both A) these deals are highly impactful examples as companies look at reimagining A0 their operating model for legal departments with a GenAI-led strategy.
SARVARTH M M I s S RA 120 A1 LISA A2 : What advice would you give to leaders from non-engineering backgrounds A3 on how to enhance their knowledge and skills in technology and AI?
A4 SARVARTH A5 : I think A6 vertical expertise matters as technology becomes more A7 democratized, where models will become much more readily available, and A8 coding will become easier.
I think when you are solving problems, you need to A9 be an honest student of the subject at hand.
inking deeply about problems A@ within any domain is essential.
Ive oen been questioned about the logic of AA pursuing a law degree before creating a tech product.
But aer seven or eight AB years of doing this work, I realize the value of my legal domain experience.
AC With AI technology becoming increasingly accessible, domain expertise, in AD many ways, will be the dierentiator in the coming decade.
Understanding AE contracts and the legal system has been invaluable.
I understood what could AF be commoditized.
AG I would not underestimate the potential of individuals with diverse backgrounds AH in biology, healthcare, nance, or any other eld to excel in technology.
Domain AI expertise is sought aer, and with technology becoming increasingly accessible, AP it will be the dierentiator in many ways in the coming decade.
AQ While general management skills are important, subject matter expertise is AR equally crucial.
As I look across vertical specialist leaders today, they have AS a mission that goes beyond just starting a company.
ey have a story, an AT experience that informs their approach.
is experience, even if its from 15 AU years ago as a lawyer, comes back to you and helps you understand your buyer, AV who in our case is a lawyer.
AW Lastly, the other thing I always believe in is the importance of core competency AX as a strategy.
I think its AY easy to sometimes diversify a business too fast.
But I A` think focus, expertise, and competency are crucial.
SARVARTH M M I s S RA 121 Aa LISA Ab : What impact do you foresee in the next ve years?
Ac SARVARTH Ad : e adoption Ae of generative AI is not just about staying relevant, Af but about leading the charge toward a more ecient, value-driven future.
Its Ag about reimagining the way we do business, the way we serve our clients, and Ah the way we shape the market.
Ai e change management that will be driven by generative AI adoption across Ap our customers is most denitely once in a generation.
It will need customers, Aq technology providers and consulting rms coming together to reimagine the Ar future state of an enterprise and its operating and delivery model.
Investments As in technology infrastructure, responsible usage, and compliance will also At increase.
When I then think about SaaS providers, we will be pushed to the Au cutting edge of technology but also will need to demonstrate more than ever Av before the value we bring to our customers to stay relevant and thrive.
Key Takeaways Long-term investment : AI can be powerful for automating manual tasks, conducting deep contract searches, and ensuring consistent reviews of third- party contracts for governance, risk, and compliance.
ere can be quick wins along the way but the implementation of AI into core processes is not an overnight sensation.
Patience is required to realize its full potential and value.
User-centric design : Understand the workow of your users as well as their technology preferences and build these into your solution using existing technology where it makes sense to increase engagement.
The role of domain specialist engineers : Hiring specialist engineers those with domain and tech expertise to work in collaboration with domain process designers, leads to successful proprietary model building.
SARVARTH M M I s S RA 122 Embedded AI for secure-centric models : Embedded AI uses techniques that keep customer data secure while leveraging it to address specic customer needs.
Engineering methods like RAG, RL, and prompt engineering personalize the experience for each user, and dedicated computing resources ensure this data remains private and isnt used to train external models.
Over time, general models can be improved by incorporating trends identied in customer- specic models within a structured system that maintains data separation.
is approach allows for continuous improvement based on customer feedback and trends while safeguarding the unique nature of customer-centric models.
Targeted AI application !
: Focus on high-value processes and modularize the !
underpinning operations by identifying specic, routine tasks within your !
industry and then select the most appropriate AI models for those tasks.
Domain expertise !
: As AI becomes more accessible, domain knowledge will " be a key dierentiator.
Leaders from non-engineering elds should value " domain expertise.
e potential of individuals from diverse backgrounds to " excel in technology shouldnt be underestimated.
While management skills " matter, subject expertise is equally important.
Core competency remains a " crucial strategy.
123 " 11 " E E dward Fine " AI and Data Science Consultant, Technologist, " and Instructor B) e lovely thing about data is that there are always younger B0 people, those who are earlier in their career, or those who are B1 just data-excited who have got the bug and want to see what B2 data can do for their companies.
at natural excitement is B3 the best ally that you have.
# LinkedIn: # B6 E E DWARD FINE 124 B7 Edward Fine B8 is an AI and data science consultant who develops technical B9 solutions to real-world problems.
He is currently an AI instructor at Anepoint, B@ but prior to this he worked in ntech, eCommerce and academia, primarily as BA the Faculty Director of Data Science Essentials at UC Berkeley.
He specializes in BB developing creative, actionable, analytical insights in results-driven environments.
BC LISA BD : How did you get into data science?
BE EDWARD BF : I started out in BG quantitative nance back in 98 and did a lot of BH statistics and optimization through the nancial crisis.
By 2008, I realized BI I was losing interest in nance but found the data scene in Silicon Valley BP enticing.
Knowing some of the earliest data scientists helped me move to this BQ area, bringing the same skills to dierent verticals its been a constant theme BR throughout my career.
BS LISA BT : What is your role now?
BU EDWARD BV : Ive worked BW extensively in ntech, e-commerce, healthcare, education, BX and natural language processing.
Having taught various university courses, BY mainly at Berkeley, I now serve on the external advisory board at San Francisco B` State Universitys computer science department.
Obviously, Berkeley is a top-tier Ba university, but Cal State is for everybody, so it has a very diverse student body Bb with a fun set of challenges, which I really enjoy.
I also evaluate AI companies.
Bc LISA Bd : What examples can you share of how you convinced companies to Be prioritize data?
Bf EDWARD Bg : I was brought Bh in as the rst lead data scientist at a fashion startup Bi called Kings Lane.
It was a very brand-driven company, so you could make a Bp strong case for data but trying to get artistic, fashion types to buy into it was a Bq challenge.
So, my strategy was to introduce a low-stakes, internal data product, Br focusing on cost savings rather than revenue enhancements to build trust.
E E DWARD FINE 125 Bs Of course, the bottom line is never as sexy as the top, but with a relatively Bt simple product, we provided analytics on customer purchase patterns to the Bu inventory buying team.
is was a ash sale type model where the buyers Bv needed to know what actually sells.
Because it was an online store, we had Bw a SQL database with what had actually sold, but it wasnt accessible to the Bx back-end buyers.
We started with rugs and asked which tended to sell, 2m x By 1m or 3m x 5m?
en I was able to make an initial win with a sequel query B that would run that, then I put it into a product and gave it to the buyers so B that they were able to look at what had sold and how consistent a bestseller B it was.
Standard deviation turned out to be tremendously powerful to them B because these things would always sell, but did they have to put it on the back B tier where there was a greater markdown?
What products would sell on the B rst sale with the highest selling price and what would end up selling later B on?
We were able to have them alter their buying plans and that got us fans B on that side of the house.
B LISA B : How specic could you be about what sold well?
B EDWARD B : It was interesting B to see where the strengths and limits were with B this.
Because this brand was in a very fast-changing industry, historical data B analytics on things like color were not predictive because trends were always B changing.
It was a very interesting piece of wisdom because the types of insights B we data guys provide are great in stable environments, like those youd nd in B hardware screws, for example, but something as trend-driven as home dcor is B not as stable an environment last years average isnt going to tell you much B about this years.
So, as a data person in retail and especially in e-commerce, C you need to know what things will change and what will stay the same from C this year to the next.
While you can predict seasonal sales for things like C umbrellas in the rainy season and gloves in winter, fashion C trends require a C level of respect for the experts whose job it is to stay on top of them.
E E DWARD FINE 126 C LISA C : Whats your approach to solving problems in a company?
C EDWARD C : I aim to C identify a specic mandate with a specic group.
If you C nd yourself in the unfortunate situation of hearing, Heres our database, C add value, thats tough because it lacks specicity.
So, your job is to strike C up casual conversations (real or virtual) with individual contributors or low- C level managers, to understand their pain points and identify ones you can C alleviate.
You aim to build credibility with individuals, but the ultimate goal is C to demonstrate value quickly by addressing a problem that signicantly helps C the business.
Its a tricky sizing piece, and one where junior data people oen C get tripped up because you dont want to do something thats too big because C it will meet with internal resistance, but you dont want to do something so C small that it doesnt make a dierence.
C Ideally, if you can pay for your rst six months of salary within a couple of C!
weeks, thats a great win.
C" LISA C# : Can you explain how you build a product and drive internal adoption?
C$ EDWARD C% : e rst C& thing I did was run a query, take a snapshot, and drop it C' into a report, pushing it out in an automated email to business stakeholders.
C( is was how I did it back in the Dark Ages, and because of our on-premises C) security model it was not easy to build a website around it.
is was probably C0 around the time Yammer was purchased by Microso, in 2012.
at was good C1 enough to deliver a Monday morning report.
e data actually changed, probably C2 once every six weeks, so an email format with this slow-moving data was ne C3 in those days.
What I would do is take on some kind of driven analytics system C4 theres a whole bunch from Microso or I would build it out with a fast C5 API these days.
Now I would probably just go to my favorite GPT and tell it C6 what tools I wanted C7 to use and have it built out as a front-end website for me.
E E DWARD FINE 127 C8 LISA C9 : What mistakes have you made and lessons learned?
C@ EDWARD CA : Oh, so many.
Ive CB made a career of it!
Patience, humility, and strategic CC positioning of quick wins in adjacent areas can build trust and gradually steer CD the organization toward a data-focused culture.
CE Each new assignment or role in a company requires understanding its unique CF corporate culture and recognizing resistance points.
Any attempt to bring in CG data-driven changes should respect these dynamics.
Finding a few key allies at CH the start helps you assess whats really important and understanding the culture CI will give you the context of whether the changes you bring will be accepted.
If CP the culture is that way for no good reason, then you can probably work with CQ it.
But if its that way because they once had a million-dollar screw-up, then CR youre going to have a tougher time.
CS LISA CT : How can a senior business leader drive change amidst the intimidating jargon?
CU EDWARD CV : Encourage CW curiosity and openness in understanding new terms CX and concepts.
CY e secret advantage everybody has is their young people.
Leveraging the C` energy and drive of young, data-excited individuals in the company is crucial Ca because theyll put in the extra work to explore what data can do in their Cb companies.
ey see that it brings a natural advantage and helps them become Cc a more valuable employee, in their current company and in their future career.
Cd And, when it comes to feeling intimidated, the biggest obstacle is that people Ce dont want what they dont know to be exposed, so I lead by example.
One of Cf the things I learned at Microso was to be ruthless about asking what three- Cg letter acronyms meant.
e rst time you do it, you might look silly.
But Ch aerwards, you get known as somebody who, if they dont know something, Ci is willing and curious to ask.
E E DWARD FINE 128 Cp LISA Cq : What excites you most about the future of data?
Cr EDWARD Cs : Im thrilled Ct about the potential of generative AI and its capacity to Cu process specic training data.
Right now, were seeing the amazing power of Cv generic large language models, but the power of applying those models, ne- Cw tuning them, combining them with an individual, or an enterprise, a company, Cx a startup that data is going to be amazing.
Imagine a world where we can Cy capture data from our surroundings using our phones and have AI process it C and provide valuable insights.
Say, I walk around my garden with my phone C and AI gives me advice about whether Im watering too much or whether the C citrus trees need more iron.
Or maybe I can take a picture of that thing thats C not working in my home and it will recommend the right video to show me C how to x it or customize a video to my specic skills.
I cant wait for that!
C LISA C : Whats your advice for building an eective team?
C EDWARD C : Its rare to nd a C full stack data scientist.
ey do exist but they C tend to be consultants and very expensive, so aim to build a team with a mix C of business, mathematical, and engineering skills, the latter in someone who C knows the architecture of data in the company.
Borrowing engineering talent C from other teams can work initially.
You can then focus on enhancing their C skills if they show enthusiasm for data.
C LISA C : Do you see the skill sets people need changing because of AI?
C EDWARD C : Yes, and it C depends on what stage youre at.
eres a need for skilled D engineers who can help with the integration of complex data systems, like a D data EKU, Pekin AI, or other types of data analytics as a service product.
ese D are becoming increasingly important in the business domain.
A new business D professional will oen nd that these tools either have not yet been established D or, if they have, they are concentrated in one specic area; for example, Google D Analytics or similar web analytics tools monitor the front-end and are very D good at that.
Or, a CFO might have sophisticated analytics tools on the nancial E E DWARD FINE 129 D end, but they are oen specialized and restricted to their particular vertical.
D So, the changing landscape necessitates a range of skills from understanding D and implementing AI and data analytics tools, to integrating them across D dierent verticals for a more holistic business approach.
A Key Takeaways A A A Careful targeting of use case A : Swily demonstrate value by solving a signicant A business problem.
Ensure the use case is strategically sized too large may A face resistance, while too small may lack impact.
is is a common pitfall for A junior data and AI professionals.
A B B B : AI is reshaping skill set needs, increasing the demand B for engineers who can handle complex data systems.
Teams therefore need B a mix of business, math, and engineering skills.
Due to the scarcity of full B stack data scientists, its benecial to borrow and nurture talent from other B teams.
Developing the ability to understand, implement, and integrate AI B and data analytics tools across various verticals delivers a comprehensive B business approach.
B C C Building trust through low-stakes data products C : Building trust with data C starts small, such as introducing a low-stakes, internal data product focused C on cost savings.
By understanding the pain points of a specic group within C the business and addressing them with a data-led solution that quickly C demonstrates value will establish momentum.
Patience, humility, and focusing C on these initial quick wins in adjacent areas will lay the groundwork for a C data-driven culture as a prerequisite for AI solution development.
C D D Navigating corporate culture D : Understanding the unique corporate culture D in a company is crucial, as is recognizing resistance points.
Finding a few key D allies at the start helps assess whats really important, and understanding the D culture provides context for whether the changes will be accepted.
E E DWARD FINE 130 D D D Role of senior leaders D : Senior business leaders can drive change by encouraging E curiosity and openness.
Create an environment where its okay to not know E everything and to learn together.
Understanding new terms and concepts E is crucial.
Lead by example, such as asking about unfamiliar terms.
E E E Harness the energy of younger colleagues E : Recognize the natural enthusiasm E of younger individuals, those at the early stages of their careers, or those E simply excited about AI.
eir willingness to explore its potential not only E enhances their value in the current company but also bolsters their future F career prospects.
131 F 12 F Sanjeevan B B ala F Dd We developed the last mile approach to shorten the time to De value by focusing on the last stage changes, including business Df processes and functional needs.
We made the outcome value Dg the last mile and worked backward, instead of what you oen Dh see, which is people collecting lots of data, then building a lot Di of technology, then putting in data scientists.
G LinkedIn: G sanjeevanbala Dr SAN j J EEVAN B B A l L A 132 Ds Sanjeevan Bala Dt is the Group Chief Data and AI Ocer at ITV.
Prior to this he Du was Head of Data Science at Channel 4 and has previously held roles within Dv PwC, Dunnhumby, and a number of startups in Silicon Valley.
He is also a Dw Non-Executive Director of a Multi-Academy Trust where his role inuences Dx how we shape education to secure the next generation of AI talent in schools.
Dy He is also a FTSE 250 NED of a global B2B food business.
D LISA D : Could you briey describe your career up to now?
D SANJEEVAN D : My career D falls into four phases.
e rst was classic customer- D centric management consultancy, asking, how do you put the customer at the D heart of the organization and what does that mean for the operating model and D customer journeys?
en I went into launching digital businesses during the D dot-com bubble, working with entrepreneurs to get funding and then building D digital businesses and scale-ups.
For example, at Citibank we launched their D direct consumer City X product proposition model in the US.
D Next, I shied client side to Channel 4 and eBay.
As Id done consultancy work, D I knew what I was looking for and how to apply all these learnings internally.
D e big focus was on culture change, executive mind shi, and delivery of D the strategy.
D e last phase of my career has been in a non-exec role, working out how to D amplify my contribution at board level, and ensure skills and understandings D lead to value creation and, critically, prevent value loss.
D Now, Im the Group Chief Data and AI Ocer at ITV driving growth through D data and AI across studio and regular TV business segments.
ITV produces E content, promotes it, distributes it, and then monetizes it.
My role is nding E value cases across that entire value chain E where we can use data and AI to E drive growth.
SAN j J EEVAN B B A l L A 133 E LISA E : How do you prioritize where to use data to solve business problems and E how do you get that backed internally?
E SANJEEVAN E : At ITV, we E look at the value chain, evaluating core activities E such as content production, promotion, distribution and monetization.
For E each of these processes, we ask, How might data change increase or protect E value?
For example, if we could build a predictive model, how might we use E that to acquire customers more eectively?
And, if we could do that, what sort E of li might we see in marketing?
We generate a lot of value cases across the E business working with dierent stakeholders ensuring buy-in from all parts E of the business.
e accountability of these value cases remains with each of E the functional leaders.
E We start with individual use cases to understand their commercial viability, E co-signing the value potential with each business leader.
Next, we consider E augmenting the existing revenue forecast, for example, where can you use E!
data to bring in viewers at a lower cost per acquisition?
Finally, we look at E" the net new revenue beyond the original ve-year plan.
You need to take a E# commercial and value lens to the CFO and convert those numbers to aligned E$ objectives in the annual revenue plans and targets.
ats how we got alignment E% in the organization.
E& LISA E' : How did you organize the data team and costs to achieve this?
E( SANJEEVAN E) : Firstly, we E0 decentralized data skills, embedding data scientists, E1 engineers, and analysts into business units.
is was key as it fostered ownership E2 of the functions and the responsibility for delivering value wasnt with the data E3 team but their business unit.
Integrating data into the teams so they all act E4 together also built trust.
ey saw the data team as part of their team.
E5 Were currently moving costs to the business units to activate ownership of the E6 investment and the value realization.
is overcomes the unnecessary tension E7 in the organization where the data unit is promising all this value but has E8 no control of the levers.
You need the ownership and the cultural alignment E9 where the costs are being incurred, but also E@ where the value is being realized.
SAN j J EEVAN B B A l L A 134 EA LISA EB : Do you have communities of practice in the center?
EC SANJEEVAN ED : Yes, the EE center acts as the glue between dierent domains and EF dierent organizational components.
For example, with projects initiated in EG marketing, we can quickly take a commercial overview and say, If we change EH this data product slightly, it can have repeatable applications.
Weve eectively EI taken the data as a product route, which lets us identify and introduce the EP best standardizing practices.
Rather than building a data lake, were introducing EQ a data mesh architecture that decentralizes control and everything into the ER business unit, enabling the business to own technology and data responsibilities.
ES is type of architecture enables the business units to control the following: ET how shared data is accessed, who accesses it and in what formats.
EU LISA EV : What was your starting point at ITV?
EW SANJEEVAN EX : I started at ITV in 2020 just as lockdown started and the whole EY strategy and board E` engagement was done virtually and remotely.
When I joined, Ea the business understood data was important on a philosophical level, but it Eb was quite nascent and foundational.
ey had a classic starting point of, Lets Ec collect data because we sort of feel its important and lets put it somewhere.
Ed is meant that there were various degrees of data at dierent quality levels.
Ee ere was registration information and data on what people were viewing on Ef what was then ITV Hub.
is was physically made available and put into a Eg cloud environment.
ey had some resources, like an analyst and a couple of Eh data scientists.
e bit that was missing was the explicit link to the TV strategy, Ei which then and now is around three pillars supercharging, streaming, and Ep monetizing our studio IP.
We linked these pillars to the data strategy which Eq helped us try explicit use cases and value cases.
We prioritized the value case Er over the use case because it compelled the business and the data unit to rethink Es what it would take to fully realize this value.
SAN j J EEVAN B B A l L A 135 Et LISA Eu : How did the last mile approach develop and get adopted?
Ev SANJEEVAN Ew : We developed the last mile approach to shorten the time to Ex value by focusing on the last Ey stage changes including business processes and E functional needs.
We made the outcome value the last mile and worked E backward, instead of what you oen see, which is people collecting lots of data, E then building a lot of technology, then putting in data scientists.
E We proved the viability by taking a thin slice approach, building vertically E instead of horizontally focusing on specic value pieces.
We asked, OK, for E this bit of value, what is the minimum amount of data infrastructure model that E we need to go end to end?
So, wed collect the data, tag it up on our website, E build a model, put it through a security solution and email our website users E to see if we can get them to activate.
Once we prove that, we enable iOS, then E Xbox, then PS4, and iteratively do it like that.
E is approach meant we were hitting last mile challenges early, which meant E we could pivot and iterate the strategy.
We learned lots of things vertically in the E stack, rather than horizontally, for example, problems relating to data quality, E connectivity into the matrix pack, about the dierence between the universe E population and the available population.
Drawing on our understanding of E connectivity, we could integrate what we learned into the design and functionality E of social platforms.
Also, our insights into attribution could be leveraged to E enhance social platforms and user interaction analysis.
E Once weve promoted on TikTok, how do we measure whether they came back E in and watched our content?
ese thin slice vertical learnings are how we F got traction and buy-in from the business.
SAN j J EEVAN B B A l L A 136 F LISA F : What was the shi in how data programs were organized before and F aer you joined the business?
F SANJEEVAN F : Before I arrived, the F programs were tech-driven because a lot F of it was cloud compute and distribute, so there was a lack of connection F to business strategy.
Once the business understood the connection to the F corporate strategy and revenue and margin implications, it became a much F more business-driven initiative.
F My unit sits in the business, not in technology so we developed a trio strategy F between myself, the CTO, and the business leaders.
We all had slightly dierent F objectives which was key.
e business was responsible for the last mile F adoption, organizational change, business change and realization of value.
F e data unit was responsible for the art of the possible, the what if?
and F introducing a new narrative.
e technology teams are responsible for reducing F time to business value.
is shi led us to partner and buy capabilities rather F than build everything, which allows us to maintain modularity for future needs.
F e technology team really shied their thinking about how to reduce time F to value rather than build.
A lot of businesses functional problems have now F!
been commoditized by a technology solution, so youve got to be really clear F" on the business case if you are going to build something internally.
We have F# adopted a classic LEGO strategy a modular approach to everything we do F$ so we can pull one bit out and put something else in down the line.
F% We helped core engineering teams understand higher-order assembling versus F& building.
is was an interesting process because as a lot of the Soware as F' a Service (SaaS) providers spaces F( are being rapidly commoditized, theyre F) going further up value streams and adding on capabilities to protect their F0 margins.
To ensure modularity, we were careful about the core capability we F1 were buying; for example, were seeing F2 SaaS providers bundling the capability F3 with the tracking which can be really hard to unbundle in three years time if F4 you are reliant on the tracking.
SAN j J EEVAN B B A l L A 137 F5 LISA F6 : How did you ensure thinking around planning for horizon two (emerging F7 opportunities) and three (future growth ideas) technology, while managing F8 horizon one (core businesses providing most prots and cash ow, with a focus F9 on improving performance)?
F@ SANJEEVAN FA : We FB have a design authority community who do a lot of horizon FC scanning through the Digital Advisory Council (including external CEOs and FD non-executive directors), to look at what other technologies and trends are FE coming up and to ensure when engineering and architecting that we preserve FF modularity.
e result is an injection of progressive, knowledgeable thinking, FG about trends like blockchain, Web3, and generative AI.
We dont always get it FH right but were always learning.
FI Weve also navigated challenges in pricing with SaaS providers because theyre FP scaled on a usage model.
It disincentivizes us as a business to use it at scale, FQ which has led to strange internal conversations.
For example, well sign up to FR a recommendation engine, which has higher pricing the more we use, yet we FS nd ourselves saying, How do we then reduce the usage?
But really you want FT to put it everywhere to maximize the value.
FU LISA FV : How do you prioritize AI use cases?
FW SANJEEVAN FX : At the moment, we view AI as a solution to a business problem, FY focusing on the F` value and business outcome.
Were currently in the experimentation Fa phase looking at how it might augment productivity and the creative process.
Fb eres been an interesting shi for us regarding generative AI, which we Fc describe as a distinct sort of subset, because its suddenly allowing us to create Fd value without having to be reliant on foundational high-level quality data.
For Fe example, what set of skills are required to think about the next drama plot, Ff the storyboard, and the narrative arc, and what talent could be appropriate for Fg these things?
en there are the potential uses in post-processing like special Fh eects, additional edits, multiple language translation, and audio lip-synching, Fi which weve already done a lot of trials on and are using extensively.
SAN j J EEVAN B B A l L A 138 Fp How it might be used in the creative process is currently less developed but Fq theres certainly an appetite for how it might be used, as a co-pilot tool it Fr still needs a creative leader to drive it in order to create useful outputs.
Were Fs experimenting to understand if it gives us dierent ideas or allows us to do Ft ideation faster.
Fu LISA Fv : How did you build up a team over time and retain them and were you Fw dependent on third parties?
Fx SANJEEVAN Fy : To build F capacity and get going quickly, we were initially reliant F on third parties to build teams with diverse skills like data engineering and F data scientists.
e team model had a data product leader from a consulting F background, who was business-oriented in terms of how they think and operate.
F en we had a combination of agile delivery managers with delivery skills as F well as classical digital skills data engineering and data scientists.
So thats F how we built them.
F We had a whole platforming team and had to assemble engineering and pipeline F team analysts and data scientists, and then the whole data governance part, F thats how we started building out.
We focused rst on three business areas F marketing, commercial and product.
We did this because, with marketing, we F can get the viewer in and get them to watch more content with commercials.
F With that additional content, we can monetize them at a higher yield, so we F built the teams underneath that, against those particular value cases.
F LISA F : What advice would you give to a business starting to work with AI?
F SANJEEVAN F : Id say, rstly, focus F on the value case and work out what needs F reporting, otherwise, youll incur a lot of costs.
Ask what you are going to do G with it once youve done your reporting.
SAN j J EEVAN B B A l L A 139 G e second thing is to tell a story to help your functional leaders reimagine G the aer, as well as quantify that for your board and CFO to convey the G commercial gain.
G e third thing is the importance of horizon scanning because something you G put in today could be commoditized tomorrow, so you need to avoid building G where you dont need to.
G I would also emphasize the importance of change management, especially for G traditional businesses.
Change is 70%, while 20% is about the data and the G kind of teams you need to build, and 10% is the algorithms and model.
Oen G too much of the focus is on the AI without enough focus on the change.
G Its also key to solve the last mile rst and sell it in; otherwise, you wont be able G to fully realize the value of all your investment.
Joint ownership is important G too, so, translate those li numbers into personal objectives because that drives G the right organizational behaviors.
G Empathizing with stakeholders is also key, especially if an organization has G low maturity with low churn, as starting with data/AI can be intimidating G and daunting.
So, walk in their shoes before you put your functional hat on G around whats possible.
G My last tip would be to manage expectations.
Clearly communicate your priorities G and what they will and wont deliver, as well as articulate the likely challenges.
LISA G" : Did you nd any useful templates for value assessments?
G# SANJEEVAN G$ : We G% developed an approach from experience and having been G& burned many times.
Some methodologies exist but theres no single playbook G' for this journey.
Existing templates can be found, for example, we used a well- G( established one in our change methodology, but each organization must adapt G) them to their unique situation.
SAN j J EEVAN B B A l L A 140 G0 LISA G1 : What have been the essential aspects of telling ITVs business story?
G2 SANJEEVAN G3 : ere G4 are three key artifacts.
e rst is how we dene the value G5 and revenue in terms of increment, protection and capacity.
For example, Its G6 OK to get funding for a project thats in revenue protection, because if we dont G7 do that, revenue values are going to go to somebody else.
G8 Second, we use a learning cycle to foster organizational agility through iterative G9 experimentation starting with a hypothesis, assembling an experiment, G@ running the experiment, capturing learnings, and feeding that back into the GA next cycle.
We used a version of this visual cycle in every single functional part GB of our organization.
For example, well talk about If we can get more viewers GC in at a lower cost, and we predict whos gonna churn, we can target them on GD social media, we can bring them back in and we tell the story through that.
GE ats been a very powerful visual.
GF Finally, the concept of the last mile has been essential in our change process.
GG Now you hear the business talk about how weve got to x the last mile rst, GH which is an amazing change of perspective.
GI LISA GP : What are you most excited about now?
GQ SANJEEVAN GR : e GS implications of what Web3 might do for data and digital- GT driven businesses are really fascinating.
When organizations have collected GU data and used it to drive commercial outcomes or value outcomes, how does GV that value exchange change when you think about token economics in a Web3 GW construct and how do you think about creating value in that sphere?
GX Im also really excited about collaborating across industries and combining GY dierent functional areas of innovation to open up new growth, for example, G` a media company with a retailer, or a media company with a nancial services Ga company.
When you start to think about combining in terms of the underlying Gb understanding of the consumer, then that creates a new order and unlocks new Gc propositions that can be built on top.
SAN j J EEVAN B B A l L A 141 Gd LISA Ge : Can you share any other key lessons learned?
Gf SANJEEVAN Gg : We Gh overestimated adoption and underestimated the change Gi challenge, especially in the messy middle as I call it between the Gen Z Gp digital natives starting at our organization and the board.
Gq LISA Gr : What would you have done dierently?
Gs SANJEEVAN Gt : I think we would have embedded individuals earlier and been Gu clearer about the Gv consequences of prioritizing in specic areas.
Also, I would Gw have showcased more of how other organizations with similar functional Gx processes are doing it, for instance, have a peer marketeer talking to a marketeer, Gy rather than a data professional articulating something to a function leader.
I G think this would have made the conversation more accessible from the start.
x Key Takeaways x x x Understand commercial viability x : Evaluate the value chain, including content x production, promotion, distribution, and monetization, to generate value x cases across the business.
Begin with individual use cases to understand x their commercial viability and co-sign the value potential with each business x leader.
Emphasize commercial viability in decision-making processes, view y AI as a solution to a business problem, and experiment with AI to augment y productivity and the creative process.
y y y Augment existing revenue forecast and look at net new revenue y : Enhance y existing revenue forecasts and explore new revenue generation avenues beyond y the original ve-year plan by leveraging data.
Optimize current revenue y streams and uncover innovative nancial growth opportunities.
Integrate data y strategy with the business strategy, focusing on supercharging, streaming, and monetizing IP, with an emphasis on value cases over use cases.
SAN j J EEVAN B B A l L A 142 Organizational alignment : Take a commercial and value lens to the CFO, converting numbers into aligned objectives in annual revenue plans and targets for organizational alignment on data use for business growth.
Move costs to business units to activate ownership of investment and value realization.
Overcome organizational tension by aligning costs with where value is being realized, fostering shared responsibility and commitment across the organization.
Decentralize data skills : Embed data scientists, engineers, and analysts into business units to foster ownership and trust, ensuring responsibility for delivering value lies with the business unit, not just the data team.
Complement this decentralized approach with the center acting as the glue between dierent domains and organizational components.
Adopt the data as a product route, introduce best standardizing practices, and implement a data mesh architecture to further decentralize control into the business unit.
Trio strategy development : Establish a trio strategy involving the CDO, CTO, and business leaders, each with distinct objectives: business leaders for last mile adoption and value realization, a data unit for introducing a new narrative, and technology teams for reducing time to business value.
Guide technical teams : Help core engineering teams understand the concept of higher-order assembling versus building, adopting a modular approach akin to a classic LEGO strategy for exibility and adaptability.
Establish a design authority community that conducts extensive horizon scanning through the Digital Advisory Council to preserve modularity in engineering and architecting.
Initially rely on third parties to build teams with diverse skills like data engineering and data scientists, and develop a team model with a data product leader from a consulting background, who is business-oriented in terms of how they think and operate.
Bring the business along : Focus on the value case and determine what needs reporting.
Tell a story to help functional leaders reimagine the aer and quantify that for the board and CFO to convey the commercial gain.
Emphasize change management, solve the last mile rst, empathize with stakeholders, and manage expectations by clearly communicating priorities.
Develop an approach from experience and adapt existing methodologies to SAN j J EEVAN B B A l L A 143 the unique situation of each organization, understanding that theres no single playbook for this journey.
Future possibilities : Recognize the implications of Web3 for data and digital-driven businesses, acknowledging the potential for cross-industry collaboration and innovation.
Avoid common pitfalls such as overestimating adoption and underestimating the change challenge, and mitigate these issues through early embedding of individuals and clarity about the consequences of prioritizing specific areas.
Showcase how other organizations with similar functional processes are managing these changes to make initial conversations more accessible and provide valuable insights for future strategies.
145 13 N N athalie G G aveau AI Tech Entrepreneur and Board Member He I think AI will be much faster in some sectors like content Hf creation or coding.
So, the key is the strategic promotion of AI in Hg business environments, educating businesses about its impact and Hh encouraging them to pilot it for specic use cases I have never Hi seen any program that works straight away everywhere, so you Hp need a phased approach, designing pilots and achieving small wins Hq to get buy-in from the team.
Probably everybody in this book is Hr going to say this but its true.
When you can say, We increased Hs sales by 15% in this region in a specic geography because we used Ht X for the automated pricing and push people love that.
Real- Hu world success stories can help convince stakeholders and accelerate Hv the adoption process.
LinkedIn: nathalie-gaveau-ai1 Hy N N ATHA l L IE G G AVEAU 146 H Nathalie Gaveau H is a serial entrepreneur, board member and investor in H technology and innovation.
She started at Lazard and then founded and scaled H successful startups, invested in emerging companies, and served on the boards H of leading organizations worldwide.
e rst eCommerce company she co- H founded, PriceMinister, was acquired by Japans Rakuten for over $200 million H in 2010.
She served as a foreign trade advisor of France in the UK and was H made a Knight of the French National Order of Merit in 2015.
H LISA H : What are the rst things you do when you go into a business?
H NATHALIE H : Im very H curious so I start by asking a series of questions and H learning.
What is the foundation for these analytics?
What is the state of the H customer segmentation?
Hows the distribution?
How do I optimize my trade H promotions and assortment?
en I go into category management.
What are H my consumer trends?
Whats the marketing return on investment and how do H I position myself within my category?
en I move to the supply chain, into H things like dimensional inventory optimization and smart maintenance (if there H are factories, maybe use a spend analytics product like Life Cycle).
Or I move I into product management and technology if this is a soware business.
I need I to understand how coordinated the dierent teams are, and how customer- I centric they are.
I Personally, I like to start with the customer, focusing on customer segmentation I and market strategies to identify opportunities for data-driven decision-making.
I en I go to the market and the salespeople because they quickly grasp that I if they have better data and can target the customer knowing how to make I them more successful, then they will also be successful subsequently, so thats I usually where I get the fastest response.
I Ive seen dierent-sized companies swily grasp the importance of business I data analytics (for example, Im on the boards of Coca-Cola Europe Pacic I Partners, one of the worlds largest FMCG, and also PortAventura World in I Barcelona, one of Europes largest amusement parks, which is a private equity- I backed business) and they typically respond by creating data teams.
If theres N N ATHA l L IE G G AVEAU 147 I nothing in place, theyll hire talent and learn fast how to use data.
It can be I within the sales I and marketing team or the IT or digital team, but when it I starts to develop, it becomes its own data team.
I LISA I : How have you progressed with data in your career?
I NATHALIE I!
: Starting in mergers I" and acquisitions in nance, data was always I# integral to my work, whether it was projecting revenues or analyzing sector I$ data.
I then co-founded PriceMinister, a French e-commerce platform that I% became a large marketplace, where data drove our supply-demand matching I& and informed our CRM strategies.
Partnering with ex-mail order catalogs that I' had huge databases but didnt know how to use them, we became really good I( at segmenting and automating recommendations from dierent buyers, giving I) visibility to sellers on the sales and the pricing of their products.
Eventually, I0 this information became part of the DNA of the company and a tool to pilot I1 other categories.
I2 Next, I built a social platform, selling via social media that essentially rewarded I3 inuencers or content providers based on how many sales or views they generated I4 a slightly dierent way to do advertising.
It was a powerful data platform that I5 analyzed content-to-commerce conversion using advanced tech like MongoDB I6 and Elasticsearch (a very good stack) and machine learning for tasks like fraud I7 detection and automatic product categorization or tag matching.
We had 150 I8 million products so needed to standardize and auto-categorize products that I9 were coming from multiple sellers; for example, an online article in ELLE I@ magazine would talk about white shirts, so out of your 150 million product IA catalog, wed match the most relevant products based on content but also IB other data available to us.
Firstly, we needed to identify the focus on white IC shirts and potentially specic style attributes; then, for greater relevance, take ID into account the individual prole of the visitor, their past purchases and IE preferences.
We did this on both written and visual content using Natural IF Language Processing (NLP) and visual recognition.
is was very useful to IG monetize further content with new formats and generate a ton of shopping IH intent and revenue.
As a consequence, we sold the company to a large media N N ATHA l L IE G G AVEAU 148 II group that used the technology to devise new content and advertising strategies IP for their clients.
IQ Now, my career involves investing in startups including of course the intersection IR of content, marketing and commerce, but also AI ventures and impact (a super IS carbon-accounting rm).
And, on the side, I serve on the board of four large IT companies including Lightspeed Commerce, a leading soware company in IU the POS and payment world.
Data and AI are pivotal for them to keep product IV leadership, for example, to help automate menu generation and analyze product IW performance as well as in customer service or development.
With customers IX around the world, they need to optimize standards and performance.
ey IY can do this using multiple tools, for example, enabling them to train people I` or get really skilled English speakers who can interact in real time with people Ia Ib worldwide in multiple languages.
I think it is only the beginning!
Ic LISA Id : How do you start the conversation with a company if theyre not used Ie to working with customer service or training in that way?
If NATHALIE Ig : Ive Ih worked on both the cost and resource sides, so I know the hard Ii jobs to nd, the people that are hard to retain, and that training takes a time Ip commitment.
So, I usually show the business practical examples of solutions Iq implemented by more advanced companies, allowing them to identify their Ir own issues.
ere can be quite a lot of resistance to putting new solutions in Is place, so its key to nd champions within the organization who can manage It these trials and iterate on the approach based on the learnings.
I help them Iu do a pilot scheme that may or may not work.
If it doesnt, the important thing Iv is to stop (not let it carry on) and nd better solutions.
I think the most Iw important thing is to see everybody and catch up, asking, Did you implement Ix this daily work?
If not, what are the learnings?
Im very iterative because of Iy my background in developing tech products, and I think thats important.
I I am I a problem solver, and I like pushing until things perform.
N N ATHA l L IE G G AVEAU 149 I LISA I : Where do you see the most challenges?
Is it when companies are over- I ambitious about using their data?
I NATHALIE I : Many companies I discover their data isnt well structured, or enough I for their needs, or suciently cleaned up, or they just dont own it as rst-party I data.
e underlying challenge oen lies in the data foundation itself, with I issues like inconsistent collection methods and a lack of common analytical I language.
You need to establish this common language and build expertise in I the companies with the right skill sets for data analysis, so there are multiple I challenges but its usually the foundation that has to be reviewed.
I LISA I : How should a company go about building an AI team?
I NATHALIE I : e journey I starts with dening the use case and with the end I goal: what do you envision as your ultimate goal?
is makes you go up the P food chain and reveals the need for a diverse set of roles: business experts, P domain experts, product owners, data owners, business analysts, and data or P analytics leads.
P In a very large business, there are also commercial and supply chain analytics P leads, for example.
P en you have the technology platform team, data architects, technology P architects, solution architects, and those that operate that, with cybersecurity P teams and infrastructure engineers inside it.
P en there are the data scientists who are coming up with the data products and P who work with business and analytics leads to make sure the tech platforms P provide them with the right data.
P e rst priority is building the hub and populating it with a mixture of these P proles to form the backbone of a strong data foundation thats critical.
N N ATHA l L IE G G AVEAU 150 P LISA P : Can you share an example of eective AI usage from your board experiences?
P NATHALIE P : An P instance that comes to mind is a large distribution company I P work with.
Despite its size, the company is very agile due to its well-established P customer-centric approach and structure.
ey leverage business analytics P tools across their value chain and are now enhancing their recommendation P!
systems and capturing data from channel contacts with machine learning.
P" eir power is to really master omni-channel data and predict your next order.
P# Its a large workforce, but they have more and more digital workplace integration.
P$ ey use data in their supply chain to fulll their major sustainability commitments, P% tracking water and energy usage.
is company has millions of data records, P& including a lot of information on product range by customer segment, previous P' order history, customer basket size, price, and sales growth targets this is P( how to eectively drive growth.
P) LISA P0 : What are your thoughts on the adoption of OpenAI and large language models?
P1 NATHALIE P2 : Its a P3 massive opportunity and I am very excited to see the emergence P4 of more and more teams building AI-native products on some amazingly P5 powerful stack!
For example, Im an investor in a company called Giskard P6 that provides an open-source solution for AI quality, with a testing framework P7 for AI models to eliminate risks of biases, performance issues, and security.
I P8 think companies in general are quite wary and dont necessarily understand the P9 compliance and ethics around AI unless theyre tech companies.
Traditional P@ businesses are very interested and ocking to it but are far from adopting it.
PA Like any emerging technology, adoption and full-scale integration of AI will PB take time, mostly because you need to understand where to plug tools like GPT- PC 4 into your own ways of working.
e process reminds me of the initial hype PD around nanotech.
While everyone predicted it would be the next big thing, PE in reality, it took a decade for it to be fully understood and used eectively.
I PF think AI will be much faster in some sectors like content creation or coding.
So, PG the key here is strategic promotion of AI in business environments, educating N N ATHA l L IE G G AVEAU 151 PH businesses about its impact and encouraging them to pilot it for specic use PI cases, and using good governance and safety around it.
PP LISA PQ : What would be your top tips for a company on getting value from data?
PR NATHALIE PS : Basically, data PT utilization should be strategic and organized.
It PU helps pilot decisions and then coordinate execution.
Its because of these two PV major management dimensions that I love data.
Its really important to see how PW it is delivered in teams who are using it.
It should be managed by a dedicated PX team of professionals who understand its value and can ensure its proper PY use.
Its common to see tools like Tableau being used to create a multitude of P` dashboards that create a proliferation of information that is ultimately not Pa used.
is results in a waste of resources and outdated information.
So, you Pb sometimes need to be quite drastic with really good governance to ensure only Pc relevant and actionable information is produced and used.
Pd Oen, youll get some resistance, for example, from front line sta, who consider Pe leads and customer data as their proprietary information.
ey might say, Why Pf would I give the information about a lead?
ats why, in my view, its always Pg harder to do data transformation inside groups than to add external plugins Ph like new e-commerce or supply chain tools.
Its much easier to add something Pi extra than it is to change how people work and redesign a workow or access Pp information.
But overcoming this resistance and instilling a culture of data Pq sharing is essential for a data-driven transformation because its not enough Pr to have access to Ps vast amounts of data; its what you do with it that counts Pt knowing how to leverage it for actionable insights.
Pu LISA Pv : Whats been an important lesson you learned from a failure?
Pw NATHALIE Px : We once Py had a pilot program to automate product pricing that P didnt yield the expected positive impact.
e key issue wasnt necessarily the P data but our understanding of the market and the consumers wasnt clear P enough.
So, this failure made us realize we needed to review the whole go- N N ATHA l L IE G G AVEAU 152 P to-market strategy and start again.
It also highlighted the iterative nature of P AI and data-driven projects.
Instead of abandoning a project aer an initial P failure, the focus should be on continuous improvement and renement.
P LISA P : What is the most impactful approach toward becoming an AI-driven company?
P NATHALIE P : I think it P starts with a vision from the top leadership with the P CEO leading with a clear strategy to transform the company into a data-driven P or AI-driven entity and then establish a timeframe, so people realize this is P going to happen.
P A proper foundation of business analytics is crucial and takes time to build, P oen a year.
Overburdening the team with a rushed transition might make P people feel overwhelmed and result in high turnover.
So, start from a strategic P perspective, giving the business a timeframe to get the data foundation right, P and gradually introduce AI into dierent aspects of the business.
With these P new pricing tools, some of the products were not even available, so you need Q to frame it in a strategic way and communicate with the organization about Q the ongoing changes and their benets.
Q I also like a bottom-up approach to let people nd smarter ways to solve their Q challenges; they become more curious about the tools, experiment, and oen Q collective intelligence works very well.
Q I have never seen any program that works straight away everywhere, so you Q need a phased approach, designing pilots and achieving small wins to get Q buy-in from the team.
Probably everybody in this book is going to say this Q but its true.
When you can say.
We increased sales by 15% in this region in Q a specic geography because we used X for the automated pricing and push Q people love that.
Real-world Q success stories can help convince stakeholders Q and accelerate the adoption process.
N N ATHA l L IE G G AVEAU 153 Key Takeaways Extracting value from data : Deriving value from data requires a strategic and organized approach, managed by a team who understands its value and can ensure its proper use.
Merely having vast amounts of data is insucient; leveraging it for actionable insights is crucial.
Early diagnostic for AI opportunities : To assess how well data informs current decision-making across the organization, start by asking questions about key areas like customer segmentation, promotions, and supply chain.
is initial exploration will quickly uncover high value opportunities for further investigation.
Phased approach : Designing pilots and achieving small wins can help get buy- in from the team.
Real-world success stories can help convince stakeholders and accelerate the adoption process.
Learning from failure : Failures can provide valuable lessons.
For instance, a failed pilot program to automate product pricing can highlight the need to review the whole go-to-market strategy and start again.
Dual approach to empowering the whole organization : e successful application of AI requires clear executive directives in a top-down approach and a comprehensive change management program.
Active participation from every level of the organization in a bottom-up approach is also essential.
Its crucial to ensure teams understand the benets of new tools or solutions, how to use them, and the improvements they can bring to their work.
155 14 Phil H H arvey Applied AI Architect QS When you look at whats next in terms of synthetic QT generation, synthetic lead-generated data simulation, causal QU ML, and graphical methods, theres a ra of new tooling that QV is more about tting together models of knowledge than it is QW specically statistical models of data.
I think were moving QX from the data age into a new form of knowledge age.
LinkedIn: philipdavidharvey Qa PHI l L H H ARVEY 156 Qb Phil Harvey Qc is an Applied AI Architect and Leader with 23 years of experience Qd in AI.
He is embarking on the next stage of his career and prior to this he was Qe the Principal Program Manager at Microso.
He is the co-author of the book Qf Data: A Guide to Humans Qg .
Qh LISA Qi : How did you get into AI?
Qp PHIL Qq : I was interested Qr in computers from a young age, so I traveled long distances Qs every day to study computer science because my local school didnt oer it.
Qt en, despite my career counselor saying it was a very bad idea, I did a degree Qu in articial intelligence at Sussex University, which means I can say Ive had Qv 23 years of experience with articial intelligence.
Qw For me, articial intelligence came rst and computer science second.
e Qx universal Turing machine was designed to test out ideas of mechanical intelligence, Qy then computer science picked up the computing side of it.
Yes, Im aware of Q the debt we all owe to Charles Babbage, an early pioneer in computing, and Q all that kind of stu, but thats my story and Im sticking to it!
Q Aer university, deciding I didnt want to be a programmer, I went into computer- Q aided design, helping an architectural visualization company manage their Q render farm to make artists more productive, enabling them to do 60 images Q a week as opposed to six.
We didnt really think about it as data as people do Q now, but they had a 3D model of the entirety of London within the M25 as a Q managed asset and you could go backward and forward in time depending on Q the buildings that had been built.
It was a surveyors dream a digital twin of Q London that managed to produce these images.
Q With the crash in the building industry in 2008, I moved into digital media Q planning, buying, and advertising with an agency that had a le server in Q a mail server.
As the sole technologist, I built machines, designed databases Q and data systems, and worked all that stu out.
PHI l L H H ARVEY 157 Q ree years later, I launched a data technology startup with the owners of the Q media agency, called Data Shaker, based on what Id built patented technology Q for mixing together time series for analytics.
is coincided with the explosion Q in big data, where large datasets on human behavior could be analyzed by data Q scientists for the rst time to reveal patterns, and the company thrived, but Q aer ve years I decided I wanted to give up writing code and take up talking R to people and helping them instead.
R So, I moved to Microso where I became a cloud solution architect for data R and AI, spending four years talking to Microso Partners, which was very R interesting.
I then spent two years working in research and engineering the R incubation of a simulation-based AI technology called Project Bonsai.
It used R deep reinforcement learning training AI models on synthetic data for industrial R applications.
At R the time of this interview, I am just about to start a new role R as a principal architect in the nance industry.
R LISA R : What kinds of business problems were you trying to solve with data in R your dierent roles?
R PHIL R : e R architecture visualization rm is the crispest example of a business R problem.
eir artists were very good at creating aesthetically pleasing images R of buildings that didnt yet exist, but it came with a lot of admin managing R rendering, gathering data, and having 3D models.
Artists are not great at R admin, but they are great at painting, so I created soware that reduced the R amount of admin and increased the painting.
My automation soware is still R running today with multiple millions of jobs done.
I regard my work at the advertising agency as the spark for all the other forms R" of data work I did.
Data gives you new ways of knowing and new things to R# know.
To work that out you have to ask the main question What can I R$ know from this dataset?
Lots of data scientists will say, Be specic in the R% question youre asking and then we can nd the data to support an answer to R& that question, but I dont really adhere to that.
I believe the general question PHI l L H H ARVEY 158 R' is really important.
Spend time working out what you can know from the data R( youve got.
When you know that, you can start making it useful.
R) You can ask, How do you know that automatically and regularly?
How do R0 you get the right people to know the right things to inform better decision- R1 making?
But it starts o with that single question, not a whole range.
If you R2 want to nd out what data can do for you, you have to be able to mix it together R3 and compare dierent things.
R4 is fundamental principle continued to guide me when I moved to Microso.
R5 ere was a whole bunch of tooling and a whole bunch of data so the questions R6 were, What can we do with these?
What can we make happen?
And, if R7 building an application in Kubernetes or a new website, What does this do R8 for our customers?
R9 So, when looking at data and machine learning, the questions are, what can R@ we know, when can we know it and how is that valuable?
Its more about the RA way that you learn and how you understand the world than it is about how RB you provide functionality.
e best examples of solved business problems are RC toward the end of the journey where weve made it a knowledge business not RD just a functional business.
So, we dont just build our customers a website; we RE tell them things about how their business is doing.
ats a very dierent kind RF of interaction and RG a dierent kind of business problem that you help people RH solve with data.
RI LISA RP : How crucial was analytics in the corporate strategy of the companies RQ you worked with?
RR PHIL RS : In the startup RT we were selling to customers who had analytics as part of RU their corporate strategy so were actively looking for tooling to draw out insights RV and fuel data-driven decision-making.
With Microso Partners it was the RW same thing, trying to provide a service solution to customers who want to do RX analytics.
So, a lot of the time the challenge was in the applied AI space, aligning RY the current state of the clients data to their desire to leverage AI, which oen R` required us to chart the journey in between.
For example, they might need to PHI l L H H ARVEY 159 Ra do some analytics before machine learning, as opposed to AI.
Or they may Rb need to migrate their data somewhere else.
But thats why technical architects Rc in data should be the most valuable people in it because, rather than writing Rd code against the specication, theyre tasked with evaluating the current state Re against the desired, and Rf then writing and drawing up the building blocks to Rg help you get there.
Rh LISA Ri : Could you always trust the data you were given and, if not, how did you Rp tackle that?
Rq PHIL Rr : I have strong Rs opinions about data quality.
A couple of years ago I saw a Rt survey that said data quality is now a C-level concern.
No, its not.
is is an Ru opinion born from employing expensive data scientists who have said, I cant Rv do my job because youve got poor data quality.
What that actually means is Rw youve asked them to do the wrong work.
If youve got data quality to answer Rx the questions, it means all the work has been done before.
But if youre trying Ry to work out if you can answer a new set of questions, then, of course, the data R doesnt t because youve not done it before it doesnt mean the data is of poor R quality, it just means that you have work to do.
You need to gather the data or R structure it in a new way.
Data quality is more about knowing the current state R of data and working toward enhancing it to answer new questions.
So, instead R of a CEO saying, Oh no, weve got data quality problems, the business is in R terrible trouble, they should be saying, Why are the data scientists complaining R about our data quality?
We need data architects and data engineers, people R who are not purely trying to apply one set of tooling to problems that have R been dened by somebody else.
R LISA R : What were the main hurdles you faced when working with data?
R PHIL R : Surprisingly, the R major hurdles were not related to processing large R amounts of data or the lack of technology.
ats no longer a problem in the space.
PHI l L H H ARVEY 160 R e real challenge is a human not technical one, getting people to align on the R questions we want to ask of the data and what we seek to learn.
For example, R lets say Ive got a large number of transcripts from my call center, and I have R a data scientist.
We now have to frame a question that has business value that R the data scientist can answer.
Data scientists can answer with statistics and S math using that dataset.
All the tools, from language models to text processes S to databases to object stores, all exist on-premises and in the cloud, so the S technology is not the problem.
e problem you have to solve is getting people S together and saying, ese are the questions we want to test; these are the S things that we want to know, these are the learnings were going to seek.
S is entails respecting the learning process, including embracing failure as S valid and valuable.
So, instead of saying, Oh no that didnt work, you can S say, Look what weve learned, for example, 10 things our data wont do or S Weve learned those tools dont work for our data and for these reasons we S need to make these changes.
en people can come together and say, Right, S were gonna change the process for the call handlers so that the data when its S recorded has these features in it.
en aer X amount of time we will have the S dataset that the data scientists can use to answer these specic questions.
e S biggest blockage is not adapting our S approaches according to the data we have.
S LISA S : How do you facilitate cooperation between analytics teams and IT teams?
S PHIL S : I actually co-authored S a book with Noelia Jimnez Martnez ( S Data: A S!
Guide to Humans S" ) on cognitive empathy, a skill I believe is essential in this S# context.
It involves the rational act of using listening to understand the needs, S$ feelings, and paradigms of the people youre working with.
It can either be S% done by bridge people, such as architects, or it can be part of a data scientists S& role.
Because its a human skill, it unlocks a whole amount of success where S' the technology just wont.
PHI l L H H ARVEY 161 S( LISA S) : What types of organizational structures get the best out of people and data?
S0 PHIL S1 : Two approaches S2 work well: diverse integrated teams or adept bridge S3 people.
What that means is you need people to work together.
e rst brings S4 people together to experience each others worlds and promotes understanding S5 of dierent domains.
For example, in the call center, if a data scientist has never S6 been in a call center, no matter how smart they are theyre specialists so wont S7 get the reality, unless they experience it.
When they do, they can understand S8 how to ask the right questions in the right way to get the data they need.
S9 e second approach can be just as successful, using bridging people to talk S@ to the data scientist and, for example, spend an aernoon in the call center SA and translate back and forth.
ey are technical enough to talk the talk, but SB you wouldnt want them to write the code, while they can understand what SC the call center people are doing through observation, but they couldnt run it SD themselves.
ey are invaluable to a business because they can build trust on SE both sides and bring those pieces together.
So, if you can integrate teams, do SF that, but if you cant, then look for those special people and pay them properly.
SG Its not a junior role; they have to lead on both sides and thats hard and takes SH good SI experience.
SP LISA SQ : Have you found it hard to make a business case for investing in data?
SR PHIL SS : I had the ST pleasure of lecturing on innovation at university a couple of SU times, not as an innovation specialist but as somebody asked to give their SV perspective.
e business case for innovation is always an interesting one, SW because business case means money the investment of time, eort, and SX resources to address a problem.
e way you get that money, and you get the SY valid business case, is by telling a good story, creating a compelling narrative S` that justies investment.
So, you need to consider, are you promising them a Sa 5% improvement in eciency or are you promising to tell a CEO ve things Sb they didnt know about the business that will enable her to make better or Sc new decisions?
What does the CEO want to hear?
And then whos investing Sd in the solution?
PHI l L H H ARVEY 162 Se Oen the business case will fall into something highly measurable, but the Sf measurement doesnt really mean anything as potential downstream problems Sg must be considered.
For example, you might say, Buy our great tool because Sh youll get 10% more throughput on your factory line.
But while it might be Si useful, you might be asking people to work harder which creates quality errors Sp through tiredness.
So, the business case is important, but you have to emphasize Sq that its going to be iterative and not all results are immediately quantiable.
Sr e best place to start is to accept the fact that you dont know as much as you Ss think you do.
St LISA Su : Where have you found the most traction and utility in the application Sv of data?
Sw PHIL Sx : e simple Sy answer is always where processed data becomes something S meaningful to people.
Regardless of the automation, AI, or any tool, the endgame S is to create an impact that is meaningful to people whether its in a call center, S a factory, or a hospital.
S For example, if your business is canned sh, you have to get sh and can them.
S If youre increasing the throughput of your factory, you need to ensure the S boats are able to draw in the right level of catch, and so on.
Each analogy will S come back to what is the meaningful change for people who really understand S the core business.
It could be a red or a green light on something; it could be S a le turn to change trac ow S through a site.
It doesnt necessarily have to S be a fancy dashboard.
S LISA S : What measures do you use to evaluate success?
S PHIL S : e biggest S impact I have seen is always on what people learn and how S it alters their way of doing business.
Reduced costs are one particular kind of S metric but oen impact measures can be qualitative rather than just quantitative.
S One of my biggest personal successes was when working with a digital agency S that changed their business model from an aesthetic branding agency to one PHI l L H H ARVEY 163 T where brand and technology meet.
ey were able to understand enough of T the tooling to say, Were not going to be in-depth data scientists, but theres T enough out there that we can plug together for our customers.
ey changed T the way their business worked to grow new value.
ey had the condence T to do that because they knew what they had to learn, they focused, and their T business grew, survived COVID, and did really well.
T LISA T : What advice would you have for people who want to start using data?
T PHIL T : Firstly, start by T learning from the data you already have.
You can use T new tools, but you dont always need new datasets.
Regularly review what T youve got and explore dierent ways of utilizing it.
ats always the thing T that I regret from my time in startup land.
I tried to do too much that was new T all the time.
You should experiment with what you have.
If youre only using T your dataset for one thing, use it for ve other things and see what happens.
T is needs an investment and innovation mindset as opposed to an optimized T business as usual mindset.
T Secondly, dont believe the hype around new tools, remain skeptical, learn from T mistakes, and dont be afraid to innovate.
So yes, focus on whats important to T you right now, but allow for experiments, because then youll be able to learn T!
your way forward.
If you feel like youre standing still, challenge yourself to T" try something new, so believe the hype for a bit and have a go.
But then stop T# believing the hype if it doesnt work out.
Dont send good money aer bad.
If T$ you learned something from it, the money was well spent.
PHI l L H H ARVEY 164 T% LISA T& : Have you had a failure that equipped you for success later on?
T' PHIL T( : is may sound T) super granular, but I think its an important point if T0 your dataset includes PDFs, all other problems will fade away as you try to T1 solve PDFs because its dicult and time-consuming to get data out of a PDF T2 (and always harder than any tools promise its going to be).
So, any other way T3 you can get the data thats not from a PDF is better.
T4 LISA T5 : What are you most excited about in how data can support companies?
T6 PHIL T7 : e T8 exciting part is that while theres lots of data, the availability of tools T9 and computational power means its never been easier to have an idea and try T@ it out.
ere are lots of things to learn; in fact, I oen push Shakespeare plays TA into the new tools Ive got just to see what happens.
TB I also think there are some super exciting things coming in the next phase of AI TC tooling, focusing more on modeling knowledge than just data.
Were currently TD in the commercialization of the previous phase, using large language models TE but when you look at whats next in terms of synthetic generation, synthetic TF lead-generated data simulation, causal ML, and graphical methods, theres a TG ra of new tooling that is more about tting together models of knowledge TH than it is specically statistical models of data.
I think were moving from the TI data age into a new form of knowledge age.
TP Its not so much about what it is, as it enables people to do really interesting TQ work again, because youre talking about modeling things that you know and TR testing them in more robust and rigorous ways.
Youre using data and machine TS learning and AI tooling to help you get there as opposed to thinking that some TT giant data-driven model will give all the answers at some point.
PHI l L H H ARVEY 165 TU LISA TV : What would be your nal message to somebody embarking on their TW data journey?
TX PHIL TY : Focus on T` people, people, people, people!
Because tools in and of themselves Ta are just that.
But people make things happen.
F Key Takeaways F F F Data as a new way of knowing F : Data is not just a collection of facts and F gures; it provides new ways of knowing and understanding the world.
F Data can uncover hidden patterns and relationships to open up new areas F of knowledge that were previously inaccessible and unknown.
G G G Importance of asking general questions G : While specic questions can lead to G specic answers, its the general questions that oen lead to the most profound G insights.
Respecting the learning process is crucial for gaining knowledge.
G is includes embracing failure as a valid and valuable part of the journey.
G Its through understanding what the data wont do or identifying which tools G dont work for the data that we can make necessary adjustments in processes.
G H H Solving business problems with data H : Deriving value from data involves H transitioning businesses from being merely functional to being knowledge- H based, using data to inform performance and enable a dierent kind of H problem-solving.
In both startups and established companies, analytics play H a crucial role in corporate strategy where, frequently, the challenge is the H alignment of the companys current data state with its desire to leverage AI.
H H I Human challenges I : Oen the most signicant challenges in successfully I implementing AI solutions stem from human rather than technical factors.
I erefore, its imperative to align people in the business on the questions they I want to ask of the data and what they want to learn.
Fostering cooperation I between teams such as analytics and IT is vital and can be enhanced by I cognitive empathy, which entails actively listening to understand the needs, I feelings, and paradigms of the people in the business.
PHI l L H H ARVEY 166 I I P Importance of diversity in teams P : e success of AI projects hinges on the P collaboration of multidisciplinary teams from various backgrounds with the P expertise to extract meaningful data insights.
Key to this synergy are skilled P bridge people who can navigate and translate across dierent domains, P facilitating cooperation and shared understanding between various teams.
P P P Role of architects and engineers P : e roles of technical architects, data Q architects, and engineers are pivotal in bridging the gap between an organizations Q current data state and its desired future state.
rough a collaborative evaluation Q process, they assess existing data infrastructure and dene the necessary Q building blocks to close this gap.
Q Q Q Data quality Q : Data quality requires continuous improvement, not perfection.
Q By understanding the current state of data, we can proactively enhance it to Q answer new questions and anticipate evolving informational needs.
Data R limitations are expected when asking new questions.
Existing datasets may R not perfectly align with previously unforeseen inquiries.
is doesnt reect R poor quality, but rather the need for data gathering or restructuring to address R new needs.
167 R 15 R E E lizabeth A A jayi R Director, Intelligent Industry at R R Capgemini Invent U) Develop an ecosystem of partners.
For large organizations, U0 partnering with large technology companies can prove U1 incredibly powerful.
Its also essential to collaborate with U2 specialists who have already been through this journey and U3 understand what good looks like.
Industry peers are an U4 equally vital part of this ecosystem.
S LinkedIn: S elizabeth-ajayi-robotics U7 El EL IZABETH Aj AJ AYI 168 U8 Elizabeth Ajayi U9 is a Director, Intelligent Industry at Capgemini Invent.
She U@ has led transformation programs for multiple clients across government and UA health industries, nancial services and private sectors, and formerly worked UB for PwC and Accenture.
UC LISA UD : Tell us about your journey in AI and role today.
UE ELIZABETH UF : I began UG my journey in AI almost a decade ago, joining Accentures UH AI and robotics practice.
Being on the front line and seeing clients deliver UI value and productivity with these technologies showed me just how much UP potential AI and robotics had.
Aer two years there, I moved to PwC in 2017 UQ to help grow their AI and robotics practice until I joined Capgemini Invent UR in September 2023.
US LISA UT : Describe your current role.
UU ELIZABETH UV : My role UW is client-focused and evangelistic.
I assist clients with UX understanding AI data and emerging tech, and help them to devise a strategy UY and roadmap for adopting it responsibly, focusing on human-centered and U` transformative approaches.
Ua Typically, my clients are very senior and C-suite level, so the initial support they Ub need is understanding how AI is going to help deliver the strategic imperatives Uc they have and how AI data and automation t into the wider spectrum of digital Ud tools and technologies available to them.
We are working across a wide spectrum Ue of industries and projects so were seeing AI come to life in dierent ways.
Uf While I was working at PwC, I played a key role in assisting public sector Ug authorities in the thick of clearing the backlog inherited from COVID and Uh also improving productivity to release more time for increasing demand.
It Ui wasnt just about tech delivery and implementation but about solving pressing Up problems, helping clients to understand and adopt AI so they can Uq improve the Ur outcomes for the public and citizens they serve.
El EL IZABETH Aj AJ AYI 169 Us LISA Ut : What is the starting point in terms of identifying the challenges that Uu you can solve with AI?
Uv ELIZABETH Uw : For Ux local councils and public sector clients, the strategic priority Uy is to deliver more with less, maximizing the benets that taxpayer money can U provide.
is means identifying processes and activities that are consuming U lots of time and resources.
I look for opportunities to automate high-volume U areas such as contact and demand management, such as the enormous number U of calls that come into councils and the NHS about everything from house U repairs and rubbish collection to a range of social care issues.
By leveraging U AI, we can reduce the eort and resources spent on routine tasks and enable U sta to focus on more crucial issues, such as supporting vulnerable citizens.
U At the same time, some clients aim to innovate, by launching new products U or services to transform customer experiences.
In these kinds of cases, we U use AI to facilitate transformations, depending on the specic industry and U problem at hand.
U LISA U : What are the main blockages you encounter in implementing AI to U impact the business?
U ELIZABETH U : Ive U identied four main challenges.
U First is the lack of understanding around AI, which oen leads to resistance U toward AI projects.
To address this, you have to promote awareness, education, U and showcase the potential of AI the art of the possible.
I try to show clients V how I can help take away the mundane elements of their jobs and enable them V to focus more on what they really want and need.
With my healthcare clients, V this is oen about providing a human touch.
V Second, theres the lack of mature cloud and data architecture.
Many clients V still operate on legacy systems that arent AI-ready.
Transitioning to the cloud V is a massive prerequisite for AI and not having that can be a real barrier.
El EL IZABETH Aj AJ AYI 170 V e third big challenge is that oen there are outdated processes and operations V that need to be streamlined before AI implementation.
V Finally, theres what I call AI anxiety, where people think AI is going to replace V them and so they dont want to engage in the program because they see it as a V real threat.
While AI might replace certain aspects of jobs, its also set to create V new roles and ways of working.
Overcoming this attitude requires upskilling V and reskilling people, enabling them to work closely with AI and focus on the V human elements of their roles.
If I can bring it to life, that really helps tackle this V barrier.
For instance, in the healthcare system, a huge chunk of clinician time V is spent on administrative tasks that AI can take over, enabling the clinician V to spend more time with the patient.
By using AI in the right way to free up V time and resources, you can literally save lives.
You can be a lot more proactive V and V preventive with the interventions that you provide, and you can improve V the quality of care people get.
LISA V" : Reecting on your journey, what are the key lessons that would help V# someone just starting out?
V$ ELIZABETH V% : Firstly, align V& your AI program with strategic priorities.
Its important V' not to deploy AI just for its own sake.
Instead, focus on how AI can help achieve V( your corporate strategy, mission, and purpose, and, crucially, make sure that V) any investments you make in AI are strategic and purpose-driven.
V0 Develop an ecosystem of partners.
For large organizations, partnering with tech V1 companies such as Microso, Google, or AWS can prove incredibly powerful.
V2 Its also essential to collaborate with specialists who have already been through V3 this journey and understand what good looks like.
Peers are an equally vital V4 part of this ecosystem.
V5 Organizations need to pivot toward innovation with peers, nding ways to join V6 forces to solve common problems and build on the progress made by others.
e V7 concept of partnership is critical to drive synergies and avoid siloed approaches.
El EL IZABETH Aj AJ AYI 171 V8 And, lastly, engage from the outset, take your people on the journey, and make V9 them the heart of it.
People include employees, customers, and stakeholders; V@ they are all fundamental to driving success.
Empower them with the skills and VA knowledge about AI to be part of the conversation and deployment.
Taking a VB human-centered and human-led approach is VC incredibly important.
d Key Takeaways d d d Targeted AI investment d : Dont deploy AI just for its own sake.
Ensure that d any investments are strategic and purpose-driven.
Identify time-consuming e processes and look for opportunities to automate routine high-volume tasks e such as contact and demand management.
e e e Resistance to AI is multifaceted e : Several factors contribute to resistance toward e AI projects.
Lack of understanding and misconceptions of how AI can work, e and its potential business impact, oen leads to leadership apprehension.
e Legacy systems, not designed to accommodate AI, can create roadblocks, e while outdated processes need to be streamlined before AI implementation.
f f f Ecosystem of partners f : For large organizations, the development of a partner f ecosystem can be a valuable strategic move.
Collaboration with industry f specialists who have traversed similar paths and have a clear understanding of f successful outcomes is crucial.
Organizations can also benet from fostering f innovation alongside their peers, seeking shared solutions to common f problems, and building upon the advancements made by others in the eld.
f g g Adopt a human-centered approach g : Engaging employees, customers, and g stakeholders on the purpose of AI integration early on is a key strategy g for success.
Equipping them with a roadmap, relevant knowledge, and the g necessary tools fosters understanding and empowers them to participate g meaningfully in the process.
is collaborative approach paves the way for a g smoother transition and, ultimately, a more successful AI implementation.
173 g 16 g Louis D D iCesari h Head of Data, Analytics and AI at h h Levi Strauss & Co.
V People trust things a lot more when they can see and touch V and feel, but data science and AI dont always lend themselves V to that.
e trick is to empathize with your stakeholders and V end users and gure out whats going to get them comfortable, V condent, and excited, and then blend that with the analytical V side of it.
h LinkedIn: i louisdicesari V LOUI s S D D ICE s S ARI 174 V Louis DiCesari V leads high-performing global analytics teams to deliver world- V class data and AI products.
He is currently the Global Head of Data, Analytics, V and AI at Levi Strauss & Co, managing a team across the world.
Prior to this, V he was Group Head of Data and AI at Vodafone, and VP of Data and Analytics V at Prudential Financial.
He is a leading expert in building global data science V teams across three very dierent sectors: fashion apparel retail, insurance, V and telecommunications.
W LISA W : How do you start identifying the problem you want to solve?
W LOUIS W : In all three W companies Ive worked with, the need for data and analytics W was recognized by the CEO and executive leadership.
Aer the respective W companies had a high-level roadmap, oen from a consulting rm, I came W in as an outside expert to expand and execute on the rough blueprint.
en, W diving deeper, I used a 2 x 2 matrix approach to understand the value and W speed to value.
W LISA W : Whats the biggest challenge in your current role?
W LOUIS W : Working with W physical product and supply chains is a new challenge.
I W nd Im happiest when Im adding value in a balanced environment that juggles W immediately monetizing projects with more signicant, long-term bets.
Some W of our go-to-market cycles in retail are about 18 months long, so getting that W balance right has been tricky in apparel, where Ive had to ensure I have the W right portfolio-based approach of things that will generate money in three to W six months, versus bigger bets that take longer to materialize.
LOUI s S D D ICE s S ARI 175 W!
LISA W" : What has your sponsorship from the company been and was analytics W# a focus of the corporate strategy?
W$ LOUIS W% : At the beginning, I found W& that everyone was in support of analytics W' and AI but didnt necessarily have a shared understanding of what it meant.
W( Education and diplomacy are always important steps to align the organization W) and get everyone aligned on what youre trying to do.
One key sponsor was the W0 Chief Commercial Ocer.
We recognized pricing and promotional strategy W1 as areas that needed help as, until that point, it was done with only high-level W2 insights, where things like price elasticity were static snapshots from years W3 prior.
is was coupled with the fact that we werent making use of the very W4 rich data we had both internally and externally.
Another key sponsor is the W5 Head of Merchandise Planning and Inventory Management, where AI can W6 accelerate and streamline things like size curves.
AI delivers smart starting W7 insights so people can then address, Where are the edge cases?
e anomalies?
W8 e unpredictable pieces?
W9 LISA W@ : How did you approach data quality?
WA LOUIS WB : I take a pragmatic WC approach.
I focus on using the minimum data we WD need to start impacting a business problem and build from there.
For instance, WE some of our external data on pricing didnt validate to a point where I was WF comfortable using it in models.
So instead, we built models based on the internal WG data we had and then used planner and merchant judgment to calibrate on WH that.
We could have spent six months trying to clean up the data and not have WI any results, or we could just move forward with something that uses smaller WP data but gets results faster my bias is almost always toward the latter.
e WQ aim is to move forward with good-quality data, yielding quick results while WR continually improving the model.
LOUI s S D D ICE s S ARI 176 WS LISA WT : How do you collaborate with dierent divisions?
WU LOUIS WV : We have to WW remember that our job is to solve problems for the company.
WX Be seless with resources and funding and focus on the result.
WY LISA W` : Can you describe your team and its structure?
Wa LOUIS Wb : My team consists Wc of data scientists, analysts, and data and machine Wd learning engineers.
We work in cross-functional squads focusing on specic We domains, like pricing, demand planning, and eCommerce.
is setup encourages Wf domain as well as functional expertise.
We loosely follow the agile methodology Wg of project management which involves breaking the project into phases to Wh ensure ecient incremental delivery, working in two-week sprints.
Wi LISA Wp : Have you ever created a product from the existing data, or a service that Wq you then sold on to other customers?
Wr LOUIS Ws : Yes, weve Wt made data products at Levis such as price elasticity models Wu and demand forecasting tools.
e price elasticity models get put into a tool or Wv an app that the planning directors, commercial directors, and so on can use.
Ww Similarly, our size forecasting is now in an app that feeds into the systems the Wx planners use and pre-populates recommendations.
Wy LISA W : How would you describe the results and impact of the work?
What W were your measures of success and what can you do now that people couldnt W do before?
W LOUIS W : Some aspects of W our work are easier to measure than others.
For instance, W when I came to Levis, I had an instinctive feeling we were discounting too W heavily and too uniformly, and it was backed up by the data.
So that was one W of my rst projects because it was easy to implement, and when youre new to W a role, you want to show impact within six months.
We did some quick A/B W tests, which split testing to compare two versions, and it worked.
Using Poland LOUI s S D D ICE s S ARI 177 W as a test and holding the Czech Republic as a constant, we rst approved the W results there.
en, we scaled it to Germany, Austria, and Switzerland.
When W that worked, we expanded to all of Europe, and nally, scaled worldwide.
W Designing a perfect A/B test was probably impossible or would have taken us W forever.
is method, with rapid testing, ensured results within a few months.
W I tend to work this way, with 80% reliability, repeat it on a slightly larger scale, W and if you get a couple of positive results, just W keep scaling incrementally.
W LISA X : Is there anything you would have done dierently?
X LOUIS X : ere are X always things I would do dierently!
For one, I learned early on X in a previous job that its vital to involve nance early on and use an independent X neutral group for your measurements.
Recently, I adopted an objectives and key X results (OKR) framework to clarify our goals and track progress transparently X for everyone.
Additionally, I learned to manage expectations better.
In some X cases, people expect AI to be better than human judgment, and in some cases X thats not realistic.
I wish I had gone out more strongly with is is going to X get us to 80% of the result very quickly rather than the expectation of Its X algorithm versus human.
Instead, we should be asking, Where do we use an X algorithm versus where do we use a human, and how do we balance the two?
X LISA X : Have you had any experiences of failure when using data that equipped X you for later success?
X LOUIS X : Certainly, Ive X had my share of lessons.
In my insurance tenure, we X developed a product fueled by consumer research and data that was a huge op.
X Although consumers loved it, it was a miss with brokers a critical misstep X!
in a business where products are sold, not bought.
You must ensure that the X" seller is as passionate about the product as the end consumer.
Another takeaway X# was the need for directional accuracy over extreme specicity, especially with X$ insurance agents.
For instance, using a simplied trac light system for AI X% recommendations instead of a specic rank-ordered list worked better.
Sometimes LOUI s S D D ICE s S ARI 178 X& exposing too much information can backre, so creating easily consumable X' recommendations that resonate with peoples psychology is crucial.
Simplicity X( trumps complexity in model implementation.
ere were instances in my X) career where I had to simplify a model for successful business implementation.
X0 e goal is to empathize with your stakeholders and end users, making data X1 science and AI more tangible and X2 trustworthy for them, and then blend that X3 with the analytical side.
X4 LISA X5 : What are you most excited about next?
X6 LOUIS X7 : Im always X8 excited to make an impact through data in business results X9 rather than focusing on fancy innovations.
at said, the current landscape X@ does oer a lot of exciting advancements.
Generative AI is obviously the latest XA buzzword.
Rather than the broad use cases, I think it holds promise in its narrow XB applications, such as product descriptions and customer service interactions.
XC In fashion and apparel, computer vision, and particularly 3D, excites me.
Weve XD seen remarkable results using computer vision for things like item similarity.
XE Plus, 3D rendering will enable customers to experience products much better XF online.
is could dramatically cut down e-commerce return rates.
XG LISA XH : Any tips for a business that is embarking on using data?
XI LOUIS XP : Absolutely.
My motto, borrowed XQ from a consulting rm, is, ink XR big, start small, scale fast.
is strategy has always served me well.
Accept the XS fact that nobody has any patience, and you need to demonstrate incremental XT progress to secure investments.
Its about eating the elephant in small bites.
LOUI s S D D ICE s S ARI 179 Key Takeaways Leading AI transformation : Empathize with stakeholders and end users, showing how data analytics and AI can benet them in tangible ways, by solving problems or enhancing outcomes.
Prioritize the value and speed to value of data projects, balancing short-term wins with long-term bets.
Assess the impact and feasibility of each project, allocating resources and time accordingly.
Work with physical products and supply chains where AI can accelerate and streamline pricing, promotion, forecasting, and inventory management.
Be innovative, using AI to create new products and services that meet customer needs.
Data and AI best practices : Data quality is not a prerequisite for initiating data projects, but a continuous process that evolves over time.
Focus on using the minimum amount of quality data needed to start impacting a business problem and build from there, rather than spending too much time on cleaning and validating data.
Collaborate with dierent divisions and ensure they have access to the data they require for their projects, and sometimes allocate funds within the company to facilitate this.
Structure a cross-functional squad that focuses on specic domains, such as pricing, demand planning, and e-commerce.
Working in two-week sprints, follow an agile methodology to ensure ecient incremental delivery.
Data products : Create data products that can be used by other parts of the organization, such as price elasticity models, demand forecasting tools, and personalized customer experiences.
Make them user-friendly and accessible, and integrate them into the existing systems and processes.
Measure the results and impact of work, using independent neutral groups such as nance for validation.
An agile approach : Adapt products and recommendations to suit the needs and preferences of sellers and customers.
Focus on business results, rather than complex innovations.
However, be aware of advancements, such as generative AI, computer vision, and 3D rendering, that can oer new possibilities and solutions for your industry or sector.
Accept the fact that nobody has any patience, so demonstrate incremental progress to secure investments.
181 17 V V ickey R R odrigues CTO/CDO in Insuretech, Payments, and Healthtech Y Ive heard about initiatives that mean well but fail because Y the stakeholder is disinterested, or the output was not what Y they expected.
Its important you take a capability approach, Y executing smaller projects before taking on bigger ones, to Y prove you can deliver the expected results.
LinkedIn: vickey-rodrigues Y V V I c C KEY R R ODRIGUE s S 182 Y Vickey Rodrigues Y has over 25 years of experience working with leading IT Y services, healthcare, telecom, and consumer electronic companies.
His areas of Y expertise include AWS cloud, mobile payments, enterprise mobility, healthcare, Y and the blockchain.
Vickey formerly worked for Samsung, Microso, Dell, Y and Vodafone.
Y LISA Y : What was your journey into AI?
Y VICKEY Y!
: Having worked Y" on both vendor and end user sides, Ive seen how Y# technology has evolved into a key driver as well as a contributor for business Y$ value.
is dual perspective has helped me understand both the hype cycle Y% and value cycle for technology and data analytics as important tools to create Y& new products or to bring new insights into the business.
Y' LISA Y( : Where do you start when trying to solve business problems with data?
Y) VICKEY Y0 : When I was Y1 at a healthcare company, we had to leverage vast amounts Y2 of raw data about various co-morbidities and conditions for our patients.
Y3 As it was during COVID, these huge datasets included blood work, medical Y4 records, data from the government, third-party vendors, and the lab itself.
e Y5 challenge we met was bringing all this unstructured data together to generate Y6 health scores that helped us identify Y7 potential chronic health risks and trends Y8 within the data.
Y9 LISA Y@ : How did you get the sponsorship behind what you wanted to do and YA how did you make it a priority for the corporate strategy?
YB VICKEY YC : Our mission YD to improve health outcomes for our patients was sponsored YE by the Chief Medical Ocer in the organization who ran a chain of primary YF clinics all over the country.
Our focus was to drive the organization to think YG about outcomes as the real value of what we do for the community itself.
As YH one of the main touchpoints for anybody with an ailment to reach out to V V I c C KEY R R ODRIGUE s S 183 YI doctors, we used data analytics to provide actionable intelligence that supported YP doctors and frontline sta in their clinical decision-making.
is was crucial YQ in creating disease management programs that targeted hypertension, heart YR disease, diabetes, and so on, where you could predict whether a patient would YS develop any of these conditions based on lifestyle, diet, or other factors.
YT LISA YU : Was this initiative led by a commercial company?
YV VICKEY YW : Yes, there was YX a very strong commercial angle.
When we had line- YY of-sight on the data, we could have oered it to insurance companies to cra Y` specic insurance products for this user base.
Of course, post-patient consent Ya and approvals were taken.
We were able to oer a packaged insurance company Yb product to add to our frontline stores, which had previously not been possible.
Yc LISA Yd : What was the quality of the data when you started working with it?
Ye VICKEY Yf : e Yg organization had evolved from a manual-based system to a digital Yh one, so we had about a decades worth of data scattered in dierent formats, Yi including machine data in PDFs and other formats, as well as unstructured Yp les like X-rays and ECG reports.
Our rst challenge was to normalize and Yq feed this into a data lake to clean it up before proceeding further.
Yr LISA Ys : at sounds challenging!
Where did you start?
Yt VICKEY Yu : We started Yv with a couple Yw of minimum viable products (MVPs) with Yx partners, and quickly realized that it required a lot of innovative thinking, which Yy we didnt have in-house.
So, we ran a mini hackathon where we invited a couple Y of partners to tackle the problem of extracting legacy data.
is enabled us to Y identify a partner with the relevant technical resources and skills to help us.
V V I c C KEY R R ODRIGUE s S 184 Y LISA Y : In terms of the process, what were the main blockages and challenges?
Y VICKEY Y : We had both Y business and technology challenges.
e technical Y challenges were around data accuracy, and the ability to lter through a lot Y of data, which could be digitized or not.
We then had to take that data to Y stakeholders (business users or external parties) to validate and conrm that Y these data models could be trusted and taken further to talk to customers about.
Y LISA Y : Did you need patient permission to use this data?
Y VICKEY Y : Yes, we needed Y patient consent when sharing with external parties, Y such as insurance companies.
However, we masked all personal identiable Y information (names, addresses, emails, IDs, and so on) and clustered it by age Y groups and location.
Y Our privacy policy as well as our data sharing policy allowed us to use data ` where it was targeted toward improving the outcomes of the patient.
If you ` are my customer and I am using your data to predict a score of you developing ` any of the chronic conditions, then I could come up with an intervention plan.
` at was okay because we were helping you on that journey.
` LISA ` : What advice would you give to people just starting to use data, and is ` there anything that you would have done dierently?
` VICKEY ` : Firstly, use ` cognitive services ` oered by various cloud service providers ` as this will help cut the time to get a solution to market by at least half.
Secondly, ` securing strong corporate sponsorship is critical to success for anybody starting ` a project involving data analytics or AI within a business product or process.
` ats the norm for all the large-scale ` transformation ` IT projects now.
V V I c C KEY R R ODRIGUE s S 185 ` LISA ` : Have you had any failures that equipped you for later success?
` VICKEY ` : We had `!
multiple stumbling blocks in the entire project, so Id say be `" ready to handle failures.
During my six and a half years, we worked with at `# least 10 dierent partners at any one time with dierent challenges across all of `$ them.
At least eight of them did not understand something clearly or couldnt `% see any business value returned but the two that did were pretty successful.
`& Also, its easy to rely on only one vendor or partner, but if that partner goes `' down, youre pretty much stuck, so dont rely on only one.
`( LISA `) : What are you most excited about being able to do with data now?
`0 VICKEY `1 : e signicant `2 increase in technology and computer capacity has `3 driven innovation and made it easier and faster to roll out projects, for example, `4 from setup to going live within 90 days.
e computer capacity and algorithms `5 available now with cloud service providers make it quick and easy to roll them `6 and scale projects.
`7 LISA `8 : How have you built up your data analytics organization over time?
`9 VICKEY `@ : We have `A two sets of resources.
e rst was focused on data analytics `B for business reporting; i.
KPI business performance dashboards needed to be `C provided to businesses as a standard practice.
As part of the IT organization `D structure, I was focused on ensuring this team provided accurate information `E to the business.
e second was focused on innovative projects, essentially `F mining through the information the organization is generating to create new `G data models and operate new products.
is involves collaborating very closely `H with partners so you can operationalize these models at a rapid scale while `I minimizing impact on the day-to-day `P activities of the rest of the organization.
V V I c C KEY R R ODRIGUE s S 186 `Q LISA `R : What is the one thing people should remember when working with data?
`S VICKEY `T : Equip `U yourself with technical capabilities and stay abreast of the `V markets evolving capabilities.
ere are multiple ways to skin a cat; you want `W the fastest and most ecient methodology.
`X LISA `Y : How did you earn the trust of your stakeholders to invest in these projects?
`` VICKEY `a : It was a `b journey.
I built my credibility gradually.
I was able to talk to `c my medical ocer and say, OK, this is something that I want to get done and I `d need your support.
Ive heard about initiatives that mean well but fail because `e the stakeholder is disinterested, or the output was not what they expected.
Its `f important you take a capability approach, executing smaller projects before `g taking on bigger ones, to prove you can deliver the expected results.
Key Takeaways Value over hype : Technology has evolved into a key driver and contributor for business value.
Understanding both the hype cycle and value cycle for technology and data analytics is crucial for creating new products and insights.
Its important to take a capability approach, executing smaller projects before taking on bigger ones, evidencing value impact.
Data-driven decision-making : Using data analytics to provide actionable intelligence is crucial to creating targeted management programs.
is approach enhances existing processes and informs the development of further improvement programs.
From raw data to targeted solutions : Data availability opens up opportunities to develop targeted products or services tailored to a particular user base.
e initial challenge, however, lies in addressing data quality issues.
Scattered data in various formats needs to be normalized and cleaned up to ensure its usability for subsequent analysis and operations.
V V I c C KEY R R ODRIGUE s S 187 Scaling up with speed : e increase in technology and computer capacity has made it easier and faster to roll out projects.
e availability of algorithms with cloud service providers makes it quick and easy to scale projects.
Running a mini hackathon can help identify partners with the relevant technical resources and skills to tackle the problems.
Be ready to handle failures and dont rely on only one vendor or partner.
Leverage the cloud for faster solutions : Cloud-based cognitive services can signicantly accelerate your time to market for AI solutions.
189 18 Sean M M c D D onald McCann Worldgroup a Our concern was creativity and thinking about how we a could leverage data and AI in terms of having a killer a cultural insight or something that would allow us to do a really amazing, award-winning creative work.
We were also a interested in thinking about creative ideas that had data and a AI embedded into them or that became part of the actual a solution.
Clients beneted from us thinking in this way.
LinkedIn: sean-macdonald-4467072 a SEAN McD MCD ONA l L D 190 a Sean MacDonald a!
is a seasoned C-Level executive with experience in leading a" innovation and digital transformation.
As the former Global Chief Innovation a# Ocer at McCann Worldgroup, he oversaw the Futures Group, a team of a$ specialists dedicated to driving the future evolution of the network and its a% clients businesses.
Prior to this, he was the Global Chief Digital Ocer at the a& organization and has also worked at a senior level at Ogilvy & Mather.
a' LISA a( : Tell us about your role at McCann.
a) SEAN a0 : I joined a1 McCann in 2015.
When I came into the organization, a lot of my a2 work was about future-proong the company.
Were a professional services rm a3 and were constantly trying to stay at the cutting edge of emerging technology a4 so that we can better service our clients.
a5 Around 2018, I spent two years really focusing on data and AI because it was a6 starting to get traction in the marketplace, and we thought we needed to take a7 it very seriously.
I was looking at how to upscale our organization and prepare a8 it for this next wave of marketing that was inevitably coming.
Right now, I a9 feel like theres this new, subsequent wave with generative AI thats taken a@ hold.
My team has been focused on the aA Metaverse and generative AI and the aB emergence of Web3.
aC LISA aD : What types of problems were you trying to solve for your customers and aE how do you prioritize them and get them executed?
aF SEAN aG : Its interesting aH because they had their own internal challenges, which aI were primarily around having their data siloed across dierent parts of the aP organization.
ey were very protective of that data and didnt really know how aQ to coordinate across silos or think holistically about how they could leverage aR their data.
eir primary concerns were about understanding customers and aS then understanding the impact on the business.
SEAN McD MCD ONA l L D 191 aT Internally, customer insight was super important to us.
I was using our datasets aU and also trying to have access to clients datasets, which varied in terms of aV how willing they were to share information with us or not.
aW Unfortunately, sometimes they werent as transparent as we would have hoped, aX because we could better service them if they were, but I think we were concerned aY with those two sides of the spectrum of customer insights and then the business a` impact of our marketing eorts.
aa Our other concern was creativity and thinking about how we could leverage ab data and AI in terms of having a killer cultural insight or something that ac would allow us to do really amazing, award-winning creative work.
We were ad also interested in thinking about creative ideas that had data and AI embedded ae into them or that became part of the actual solution.
Clients beneted from af us thinking in this way, even if that wasnt top of mind for them.
ey were ag pleasantly surprised when we came up with insights and new ways of thinking.
ah LISA ai : How did you overcome the challenge of working with businesses that ap had siloed data?
aq SEAN ar : Because Ive been as working at a very high level in the organization, I at wasnt dealing directly with clients who had these issues.
But anecdotally Id au hear about it from the teams.
I dont have many personal war stories, but there av was a media company that was just sitting on a wealth of data, and they felt aw that for a competitive advantage they didnt want to share it with the creative ax agency.
My personal view was that this was a real disservice.
I think there was ay an industry politic there, with people trying to maintain competitive advantage.
a We were denitely all cognizant that if you held the data or if you could create a a system where we were managing the clients data, then that ensured a longer- a term relationship with them because it would be very hard to disentangle us a and them.
So, the dream was always that we could create our own internal a technology where clients could port their data into it, and we would crunch a it and analyze it.
But we struggled to get that up and running because clients a all had such dierent systems.
SEAN McD MCD ONA l L D 192 a ere was tension between the ad agency, the media company, and the client.
a e client wanted the data, not even knowing what their data was because it a was fragmented across their efdoms.
en we were in our competitive efdoms a with the media agency.
So, basically, you have all this amazing data sitting in a pockets, but theres no executive champion demanding that it all gets pulled a together, nor a desire to do that because everyone feels like the closer they are a to their data, the more they hold their data like its a valuable resource that a they should retain.
a With some clients, you oen have this disconnect between sales and marketing.
a Sales oen devalue marketing.
Marketing tries to drive sales to them, but a theyd say, Oh, were better than you.
We dont need your leads, and so they a are certainly not going to be super excited to share their data or conversion a data with the marketing team.
ats a big disconnect.
b I always feel like customer care is just somehow in its own world, so thats b probably been very underleveraged because theres a wealth of consumer insights b sitting, for b example, within call center transcripts.
We did some interesting b work with one client where we went into their call center data and scraped it b all and we were able to see what would garner the highest conversion.
b eres also a separation between IT and marketing.
eres been this back and b forth of where the power resides.
Is it IT who is dictating everything, because b theyre actually determining what systems are going to exist and how theyre b going to capture data?
Or is it marketing who wants to leverage that data?
b Sometimes the key marketers are less technologically agile, so they dont actually b have the language or the ability to truly analyze or give recommendations b around what the CTO is doing.
b I feel like there are so many dynamics at play.
Oen politics and peoples b personal b motivations seem to work against integrating the data.
I think at the b core, people are not incentivized to share their data with one another.
SEAN McD MCD ONA l L D 193 b LISA b : How did you build momentum behind your work at McCann?
b SEAN b : ere are b!
three segments of the population.
ere are these very forward- b" thinking innovators who love to geek out on whats next and are always going b# to be the people calling me and attending the meetings and presentations b$ where were trying to introduce new thinking.
en theres a second group b% who really have ownership of the largest clients and the biggest pieces of the b& business.
And, by necessity, they need to maintain a competitive advantage b' and retain the business, so they need the knowledge.
ey may not be as b( naturally excited about it, but they know that they need to get in front of it.
b) So, theyre very receptive, but maybe less enthusiastic.
Its like bad-tasting b0 medicine.
And then theres a whole other set of people who are like, I dont b1 understand this.
Im not interested in this.
I can survive without knowing.
I b2 think thats like 80% of the population or more.
So, within our ecosystem, if b3 we can make a dierence with even just 15% of the group who are overseeing b4 our biggest clients and make some inroads like just having a conversation b5 around data and AI with clients and getting our data scientists and analysts b6 in front of them.
Having them think about what the success metrics would be b7 from a quantitative perspective, not only a qualitative perspective, but those b8 are also all wins for us.
b9 Ive been in the business of change for so long and have spent most of my career b@ confronting resistance.
So, for me its about the micro moments, like if I get bA a sparkle in an eye or a little change, or one door opens, or I get one meeting bB with the client.
We created this fun Data Monsters Workshop so we could work bC with clients to co-create ways for them to integrate data into various parts of bD their key processes.
We got to do that with some clients, and I was just thrilled.
bE And it turned into real ideas that went into market.
But a lot of the battle was bF just getting to the point of being able to run one of those workshops, let alone bG manifest something from them.
But were in the knowledge business, so a lot of bH my wins are around getting people smarter on the topic, starting to adopt a new bI topic and then ideally transitioning that into actual work that goes to market.
SEAN McD MCD ONA l L D 194 bP We had success with a bank in the Middle East and a big retailer in the UK bQ with our workshop.
Sometimes it was useful because it gave our teams a clearer bR understanding of where they were going to face resistance with the client and bS how to have these conversations early on with key stakeholders.
A lot of the bT wins could be very so, like how do we bridge this conversation with this client?
bU LISA bV : Did you have a sponsor for this work, or did you have to drive it from bW the bottom up and create that sponsorship?
bX SEAN bY : I was the executive b` sponsor for all of this.
Our marketing business is ba all about data, but the challenge we sometimes have is that because theyre bb deep specialists, when they start speaking, people can get a little intimidated.
bc A lot of what weve worked on over the last ve or six years is bd making MRM be (McCann Relationship Marketing) much more approachable for people.
e bf co-CEO of MRM used to call me the data whisperer because she was like, I bg dont know how you do it, Sean, but when you speak to people, they seem to bh get what we do!
bi LISA bp : What were the challenges that you faced?
bq SEAN br : A large part bs of me wants to say, What barrier didnt we face?
But bt the biggest barrier really has been peoples time, attention, and openness and bu whether I can reach someone.
Heres a funny little example the global business bv leaders used to have a weekly meeting and sometimes we would get on their bw agenda, and we presented this Data Monsters Workshop as an opportunity bx for them.
I remember in this one call I said, OK, well, Im looking for three by volunteers.
Who would be willing to try this out?
Whos interested?
eres b always one person whos immediately like, Yes, I wanna do this.
And then b its like tumbleweed.
I used to have a joke with myself where I would say, b Im just going to sit here until I get three volunteers.
And I really dont care b how awkward the silence gets.
I would just sit there and sit there and then b nally someone would say, Well do it.
So that was really the barrier I was SEAN McD MCD ONA l L D 195 b trying to overcome.
Can I get your time and attention on a topic that youre b uncomfortable with?
b LISA b : How did you build up your team?
b SEAN b : Our team b was intentionally small.
I functioned as the central point, b securing resources within our agencies and connecting them directly with b clients.
ese agencies were client-facing, and my primary objective was to b generate enough business for them to expand their teams organically.
While b I may not have achieved the volume of client acquisition I initially envisioned, b I successfully fostered client demand for the agencies services.
is structure b allowed the agencies to scale their teams based on specic client needs.
b LISA b : Beyond the conversations and the workshops, did you develop playbooks c or solutions that could be scaled in McCann?
c SEAN c : We did.
We created c this thing called Integrated Intelligence, which dened c the oering to be presented to clients.
is allowed us to see and understand c all the technologies we had across the global network to enable consumer c insights, tracking of business results, looking at programmatic media, and c even looking at things like production optimization.
Originally, we wanted to c build a proprietary tech stack and we were partnering very closely with IBM.
c We had a proposal from them, but the leadership here really resisted the price c tag to build it, and then when we went back to check the concept with some of c the people who we thought were our biggest advocates and would actually be c interested in this, and they said, We dont think a proprietary solution will c work because clients have such unique technology.
Wed be better as consultants c on how they optimize their technologies.
SEAN McD MCD ONA l L D 196 c Because of that, we ended up turning it into more of a methodology or a c philosophy around how we saw data and created a set of products and solutions c in terms of consulting services that could live underneath it.
c en we made sure internally that people understood the dierences between c what data sources are, what data manipulation is, what sources we already have c licenses for that we could leverage, and then what tool sets we have in terms c!
of data manipulation that we can leverage.
c" en, within the media oering, there are a ton of customer insight tools that c# we had and proprietary research that we did.
at was a great data source that c$ clients couldnt get anywhere else in the world.
So, we were able to create quite c% a nice story.
It would have felt cooler if it had some underlying technology, but c& we also didnt want to make a big investment that we werent ultimately going c' to be able to sell to clients.
We modeled it all out.
We had a business plan, and c( we had a pathway to get there if we thought we would have receptive clients.
c) But that was the big question mark.
c0 LISA c1 : What insights do you have for people taking on a CDO type role within c2 an organization today?
c3 SEAN c4 : For me, the c5 most important thing is a shared language, because I think c6 that if people arent actually talking about the same thing, its very hard to c7 have a conversation.
A lot of what we try to do is to create a very simplied c8 way of looking at what an organization would need as best practice.
In todays c9 world, you must get into machine learning and generative AI and explain how c@ those live as a powerful brain on top of all of the data that you accumulate.
cA To me, its mostly about change management, and co-creation is always the cB best means to get through resistance.
I feel like if you can rst get a shared cC language and then get all the stakeholders in a room and understand what cD their objectives are, then you can have them gure out how they think they cE could collectively use the data to achieve those objectives.
From there you can cF start to prototype new ways of working or nd small wins within that to start cG to transform their data ecosystem or ways of working.
ats cH the best means cI of starting to create change.
SEAN McD MCD ONA l L D 197 cP LISA cQ : Is there anything that you would have done dierently?
cR SEAN cS : A little cT more hand holding through the process.
Because we were just cU starting to perfect a lot of our change practices, we went through these distinct cV phases of, say, a focus on design thinking, and then AI and then data.
en cW we got really into change management, and lately, weve been into Web3 and cX future foresight, and I feel like a lot of our change practices were starting to cY develop right on the heels of a lot of the data work that we were doing.
c` I almost wish it was ipped because I think if I had more of those change ca management skills, then we could have had stronger conversion.
We had the cb knowledge piece down, but we didnt really have the conversion side ne-tuned.
cc ats why I think we could have done a lot more hand-holding and been a cd little more tenacious in terms of ensuring what happened.
We followed up with ce people, but maybe thats where I feel like we could have done more.
I think it cf was a little too easy for everyone to let it fall down the priority list.
cg LISA ch : What are you most excited about in regard to AI now?
ci SEAN cp : Mostly Im cq scared about whats happening now.
But Im usually an cr optimist, so Im kind of challenging myself to work out, Am I scared or am cs I excited?
ct Spinning it toward excitement, I think that were in this really amazing next cu sequence of wondering how humans and machines are going to work as creative cv entities together.
I think that the possibilities of generative AI are super fascinating cw and interesting, and I think it will create a lot of eciencies.
I hope that in cx those eciencies it will also open up more human creativity.
Just as creative cy people have had tools for years to inspire and bring their ideas to life, I hope c that generative AI becomes a tool like that.
Ultimately, I think youre going c to need the human touch, some soul, to make creativity really resonate with c people.
I think its pretty apparent when work has only been created by a c machine.
Ive listened to a lot of generated music, and it just doesnt sound as c good to me.
I can tell it doesnt have humanity in it.
Eventually, maybe this SEAN McD MCD ONA l L D 198 c is all going to get so good that you dont need humans, but I hope that itll be c more of a collaborative c setup than machines taking over.
8 Key Takeaways 8 9 9 Apply AI to customer care communications 9 : e wealth of insights available 9 in 9 customer care emails, transcripts and feedback is oen overlooked.
Using 9 AI to interrogate this data can reveal valuable insights for sales and marketing 9 teams, such as what drives the highest conversion or customer churn.
9 9 9 Upskill marketeers with technological abilities @ : eres oen a disconnect @ between IT, which determines the data capture and AI systems, and marketing, @ which needs to leverage the data.
Upskilling the technological ability of @ marketers will develop their understanding of the recommendations from @ the IT function and how to use these new tools for hyper-personalization, @ content creation at scale, predictive targeting, and advanced automation.
@ @ @ Harness resistance and creativity @ : To overcome challenges associated with A individuals time, attention, and willingness to engage, it is crucial to cultivate A an environment that encourages open dialogue.
Promoting creativity and A innovative thinking leads to distinctive solutions and strategic advantages.
A Conducting co-creation workshops focused on customer insights and the A impact of marketing strategies, promotes teamwork among stakeholders.
A Incentivizing data sharing across functions will reduce silo ineciencies, A realize the full value of the data and lead to better decision-making aligned A with common business goals.
A A B Engage key players B : To build momentum and drive business impact of AI B adoption be strategic.
Focus on the forward-thinking innovators and those B overseeing the largest clients and business programs.
B B B Focus on action and early change management B : Ensure AI outputs are B translated into tangible business decisions and actions.
Implement change B practices early to accelerate the entire AI adoption process and business impact.
199 C 19 C Julie G G ray C Head of Data and Internal Systems at Agilio d3 One of the early diculties we faced was setting the right d4 scope for our data projects.
We sometimes delivered things d5 that were too complex or too sophisticated.
We learned the d6 importance of simplicity and clarity and adjusted as we went d7 along.
It was a lesson in restraint: not to get carried away d8 with creating impressive outputs that overwhelm people.
d9 is taught us to focus on delivering clear information that d@ supported actionable insights.
D LinkedIn: D julieannegray dC JU l L IE G G RAY 200 dD Julie Gray dE describes herself as championing data to drive evolution and dF has been instrumental in transforming how data is trusted and used in an dG organization.
She is skilled in many disciplines within the IT sector, including dH sales, account management, business development, and CRM implementation.
dI In business transformation her experience encompasses system and process dP implementation, data analytics capability development, and integration.
She dQ has worked for companies including Royal Mail, Servelec, and CSC.
She is dR currently Head of Data and Internal Systems at Agilio.
dS LISA dT : Can you describe your journey to where you are today?
dU JULIE dV : My career dW began 30+ years ago with Royal Mail.
I was part of an internal dX IT group of 2,000 people, with a role in service delivery management.
Aer dY working there for 8 years, the IT function was outsourced to CSC, a global d` American-based systems integrator with circa 60,000 employees operating da in 70 countries.
Aer 14 years at CSC, across a number of sales and client- db facing roles, I moved to Servelec, a HealthTech soware company of around dc 500 employees operating in a single geography.
My role was to implement a dd sales operation capability and adoption of the CRM.
I then moved to a newly de formed function of Enablement, as the Head of Data Enablement.
Two years df ago, I moved to take up a new position at Agilio Soware.
dg LISA dh : Can you briey describe your current role at Agilio Soware?
di JULIE dp : I lead the dq implementation of Salesforce (Sales and Service Cloud and dr integrated telephony) from requirements through to deployment.
Now we ds have a single CRM solution that replaced three pre-existing systems.
is was dt part of an overall business systems architecture deployment that also included du nance and subscription solutions.
We are now moving toward building a data dv analytics capability, using the data from the systems deployed.
JU l L IE G G RAY 201 dw LISA dx : Going back to your work at Servelec, what were the biggest challenges dy you faced?
d JULIE d : Servelec was d in the early stages of its journey with its private equity d owner, seeking ways to maximize its business potential.
With a value creation d in place, we needed to have solid measurements against our targets, so we d focused on understanding what drove our success.
During my four years d there, we transitioned from having very limited systems with poor adoption d to implementing full-edged systems with a unied process, a singular data d language and structure, and a powerful business intelligence functionality.
My d team and I managed the data analytics function, creating dashboards that were d accessible to our private equity owner so they could access our performance d data directly.
Everyone loved that it was the single source of truth, and it had d the analytics.
d LISA d : What was the business problem you were trying to solve at Servelec and d where did the momentum and push come from?
d JULIE d : Our starting d point was a very ambitious growth target, so everything d had to be about whether we could realistically achieve that.
e momentum e came from the clear business perspective of working with our executive and e private equity teams on these targets.
From a personal perspective, I focused e on stakeholder management, working with the teams to ensure buy-in and e collaboration.
Instead of looking at the gaps, our approach was, Lets get e things rolling, get some quick wins.
e We had a very structured approach, with a ve-year roadmap, broken down into e annual plans with visibility as our initial focus.
We wanted to build momentum e because if something took too long, we risked losing peoples interest.
e We chose our tools, built a team, and started surfacing data, creating transparency e and an actionable understanding of our current state.
Although there were e gaps, we remained focused on establishing a single, reliable data source without e any peripheral xes.
is allowed us to start immediately and remain focused.
e However, I believe the key to success was not merely the data structure but JU l L IE G G RAY 202 e having the right governance, attending the right meetings, and involving the e right people.
It was crucial to elevate the importance of our work beyond just e a support function.
We had to assert the importance of data visibility in our e operations and, luckily, we had a management team who valued this and totally e bought into e the transformation.
It was key to celebrate every little success and e be positive in all communications.
e LISA e!
: How did you get everybody aligned?
e" JULIE e# : It was about knowing e$ our audience and knowing what the business was e% trying to achieve then using both these insights to demonstrate that data is e& not a separate function but an integral part of the businesss success.
e' LISA e( : Were there parts of the business that you found harder to convince e) than others?
e0 JULIE e1 : Yes, the service e2 area was initially a bit more challenging to convince, e3 but the sales, growth, and commercial teams were on board very quickly.
I e4 leveraged my background in sales and business Id been where they were in e5 previous roles which helped to build trust with the teams.
ere was a strong e6 sense of empathy and experience that brought understanding and credibility e7 for the changes being implemented.
e8 Although you need to sell into the senior stakeholders, the people you really e9 have to get on side are the people in the operational, front-end roles, like the e@ sales and service teams who have to input the data.
We measured peoples use eA of systems, even down to their adoption of the dashboards.
en when we eB built the story to say, ese teams had more of a success journey, it created eC a snowball eect because everyone wanted to be associated with the success eD of the project.
I found its worth pairing someone with data expertise with eE someone with business credibility eF to keep demonstrating that you are doing eG the right thing.
JU l L IE G G RAY 203 eH LISA eI : What created traction?
eP JULIE eQ : Our CEO was our eR number one user of the dashboards.
He was literally using eS them daily, which demonstrated the value of the data.
Our CEOs determination eT to make data-driven decisions set an example for the organization.
In addition, we eU also provided insights and commentary to guide the conversation with leadership.
eV For example, we shared data that demonstrated that we had accomplished 80% eW of the target, and also shared insights on the levers aecting this result, such as eX volume, speed, conversion of pipeline the factors that determined the result.
eY LISA e` : How did you prioritize the work?
ea JULIE eb : We aligned ec everything to our strategic pillars.
Every request had to be ed assessed in terms of its value to a specic strategic objective, asking people in ee the business making data requests, What will you do with the information?
ef Will that be something that you can take action on?
If a request didnt align eg with our key goals, we would challenge it.
eh LISA ei : Can you give an example of a metric that you aligned with a strategic pillar?
ep JULIE eq : Beyond sales metrics er linked to growth, we also focused on measuring es service, customer experience, and employee engagement for a holistic approach et to evaluate performance management.
We recognized the interconnectedness eu of metrics.
We joined the dots between strategic pillars while not losing sight ev that all had a bearing on the sales target.
is approach kept our strategy ew balanced and ensured support from the whole organization.
JU l L IE G G RAY 204 ex LISA ey : When you started at Servelec, what state was the data in and how did e you build credibility in it?
e JULIE e : When I started, our e data was largely in a single source, but not a single e source of truth.
ere were gaps and inconsistencies, but we were determined e to make the data visible even though we knew it wasnt accurate from day one.
e e credibility was built by making technical xes to the system to improve e data quality and pushing back on the functions when necessary.
e I remember an example of being challenged with, Please dont take it personally, e but the data in this report is wrong.
I replied, I dont take it personally, because e it is your data.
Having the condence to push back was key because teams e needed to accept accountability for data quality.
We could put the governance e in place, audit and create reports to visualize the data, but we needed our users e to care about it, because if they care about getting the data right, they are likely e to care about everything else in their role and about continuous improvement.
e We shone a light on the teams that had excellence in data management e and e tried to create a competitive spirit around getting data right.
e LISA e : How did that work on a practical level?
f JULIE f : Not unusually, we started with sales everyone was interested in sales f performance but f once we reached a certain point, we decided to look at other f areas.
We didnt go to the nth degree to make sales reporting perfect in every f aspect.
Instead, we maintained a balance across all the strategic pillars.
Not f going too deep into any single area ensured we could keep the focus on the f full picture.
f LISA f : When you rst joined, did you have a team?
f JULIE f : I initially started f working alone.
My rst major assignment was to f evaluate and restructure our CRM, which was our main data source.
Aer f about a year, I hired two business intelligence (BI) analysts and we also worked f with an external company.
Despite the small size of the team, we delivered a JU l L IE G G RAY 205 f signicant volume of work, including running reports for all business functions, f across sales, service, nance, HR, legal, development, compliance, and facilities.
f LISA f : How would you describe the impact of your work on the business?
f JULIE f!
: I believe f" the impact was wide reaching.
Our approach was embraced f# across the organization; our reporting tools were used in every meeting and f$ even employee performance reviews.
We integrated a culture of continuous f% improvement into our operations, with data feeding into all governance and f& meetings.
Additionally, we were transparent, sharing the data directly with f' our private equity owners.
ere was no data massaging; it was accessible f( to everyone who needed it, internally and externally.
It was a really positive f) transformation and extremely well f0 received.
f1 LISA f2 : What challenges did you face?
f3 JULIE f4 : Initially, it was f5 daunting.
Keeping up energy and optimism was essential, f6 given that we started with subpar systems and data.
However, the companys f7 positive culture and the excitement for the project made the journey enjoyable f8 and rewarding.
Yes, it was demanding, and prioritizing tasks was key, but f9 overall, the experience was so positive.
f@ LISA fA : What key insights would you have for organizations at earlier stages of fB using their data?
fC JULIE fD : Context is fE key.
Understanding the company culture and tailoring your fF approach accordingly is crucial.
Align everything with the strategic goals to win fG support at every level.
Embrace transparency and dont be afraid to go quick, fH even if the data isnt perfect.
Acknowledge and credit all those involved in the fI journey.
For me, its about focusing on the so skills and those stakeholder fP skills as much as the technical side of building data models.
And remember, JU l L IE G G RAY 206 fQ a beautiful visual can wow people, but it needs to actually be eective; dont fR get carried away with them.
fS LISA fT : Is there anything that you thought was a failure at the time, but actually fU equipped you for later success?
fV JULIE fW : One of the fX early diculties we faced was setting the right scope for fY our data projects.
We sometimes delivered things that were too complex or f` too sophisticated.
We learned the importance of simplicity and clarity and fa adjusted as we went along.
It was a lesson in restraint: not to get carried away fb with creating impressive outputs that overwhelm people.
is taught us to fc focus on delivering clear information that supported actionable insights.
fd LISA fe : What are you most excited about?
ff JULIE fg : My university fh degree is in English Literature so, for me, the thrill comes fi from storytelling.
Turning complex data into a clear, compelling narrative that fp prompts action is what I enjoy the most.
A beautifully complex data project that fq leads nowhere is less fullling fr than a simple one that drives meaningful change.
fs LISA ft : What would be your tips for people trying to present actionable data?
fu JULIE fv : Start with fw energy and ensure everyone feels involved.
Regularly sense- fx check your work by inviting individuals who arent as closely tied to the data fy to provide feedback.
So, if its a nance dashboard, get somebody from HR or f a dierent team to challenge you on the simplicity, asking, Is it clear enough?
f Finally, lead by example you have to walk the talk.
In our team, we held f ourselves to the same standards we set for others, even employing user feedback f and dashboard usage statistics to measure our performance.
By tracking which f pages of data were most visited, by which kind of role and so on, we could f assess whether wed hit the mark or whether we hadnt.
And we continuously f rened our approach based on that.
JU l L IE G G RAY 207 h Key Takeaways h h i Strategic alignment i : Establish a unied process, a singular data language and i structure, and robust business intelligence functionality.
Align all aspects of i your business to strategic pillars, pairing someone with data expertise with i someone with business credibility to align with business objectives, enhancing i the organizations decision-making and strategic development.
i i i Phased transformation i : Take a phased approach to transformation, starting p with establishing clear business objectives and robust systems.
e rst phase p of the transformation establishes the right insights and reporting mechanisms p to make data visible in operations.
e second phase builds the momentum p for change driven by a clear business perspective.
e third phase scales the p established systems and processes across various channels to ensure that the p transformation benets the entire organization.
p p p Engage sales teams early p : To mitigate resistance and cultivate trust, quickly q onboard sales and commercial teams as these typically handle crucial data q input.
Engage these teams to reinforce the priority of visibility and accuracy q in growth performance data.
q q q Data transparency and ownership q : Make data visible from the start, even if q there are gaps and inconsistencies.
Continuously improve data quality through q process and technical xes and establish a culture of data ownership.
Foster q a competitive spirit around getting data right to underscore the importance r of not just having data, but ensuring its credible and actionable, and can be r used as a strategic tool for decision-making.
r r r Holistic performance management r : Beyond sales metrics, include those on r service, customer experience, and employee engagement for a more complete r view of performance.
Recognize the interconnectedness of these factors for r a balance strategy toward achieving sales targets.
r s s Positivity can fuel progress s : Maintain energy and optimism, especially when s starting with subpar systems and data.
Nurture a positive company culture s with an enthusiasm for the project to make the journey enjoyable despite s the challenges.
209 s 20 s Peter Jackson s g9 You dont have to complete A before moving to B.
You can g@ work on multiple elements simultaneously, provided youre gA doing it correctly In that way, other use cases can li o at gB the same time or later on.
t LinkedIn: t peter-jackson-aa518711b gE PETER JA c C K s S ON 210 gF Peter Jackson gG is the Chief Data and Technology Ocer at Outra.
Prior to this, gH he held a series of senior data roles at companies including Legal & General, gI and Carruthers and Jackson.
He is the co-founder of the CDO Summer School gP which now has 900+ international alumni and the co-author of three best- gQ selling books, including gR e Chief Data Ocers Playbook gS and gT Data Driven gU Business Transformation gV .
gW LISA gX : How did you start working in data and AI?
gY PETER g` : I started my ga career as a business analyst, where I honed my problem- gb solving skills, breaking down business problems and understanding the process gc ow and skills I still use every day.
In 1998, as the internet took o, I became gd a self-taught full-stack back-end engineer.
en I became CEO of a company ge that developed integrated CMS and CRM systems long before the big players gf had thought about such a thing.
We were sticking databases behind CMS gg systems to restrict logins for membership systems, and to direct personalized gh content for people in their web experience.
However, I realized that rather gi than building the platform, the real value was in the data inside it, and how it gp could be leveraged to gain more customers or make predictions.
gq ats when I moved into data, working for several years for a boutique agency gr called Pagoda Mason.
ey were oen integrated into the big four rms because gs they talked digital but not data, which was a challenge because these rms gt lacked a data strategy nobody understood what that was then.
So, it was all gu within digital strategy which meant that the CIO and CTO had their arms gv wrapped around everything.
gw My rst opportunity as a data leader came from the Pensions Regulator, where gx the CEO, Lesley Titcomb, with a sta of 560, was embarking on automatic gy enrolment for workplace pensions in the UK.
Its a risk-based regulator, and g she had the ash of inspiration that the risk would be visible in the data, so the g collection had to be absolutely tip-top, ecient, and automated.
is data was g coming daily from HMRC and the payee, and also from employers.
Her words g at the time, We need to have the capability to nd the signal in all the noise, PETER JA c C K s S ON 211 g actually blew my mind that somebody from a civil service background could g understand these things.
We did some really interesting work there and I also g got sucked into doing stu in the Cabinet Oce and the Treasury, which has g been a pleasure and a real honor.
g en Southern Water recruited me to address their data-related issues, as g they were hounded by regulators who didnt trust their data.
I was primarily g tasked to increase customer satisfaction, reduce operation costs, improve data g assurance and quality, and increase shareholder value.
It was immensely helpful g to have these clear targets and I would say its one of the rst things you need g if you want to have any success consider what you are being asked to do in g terms of business outcomes.
If asked to improve data quality, ask why?
What g is the business outcome that it is going to help?
g Next, I joined Legal & General in a very ambiguous new role they created, g Group Director of Data Science, with a remit to leverage and evangelize the g power of data and data science g across the whole group.
Broad and global, it was h a lot of fun with lots of opportunities but also frustrating because there were h lots of challenges too.
Aer 18 months, I took on a second role as the interim h CDO (Chief Data Ocer) of the investment management business which led h to getting into a lot of asset management and delivering a 35 million data h transformation for which I secured the budget and initiated.
h During COVID, I worked for a year with Exasol, a competitor to Snowake.
h Despite their struggles, it was an enlightening experience as I had used both h of them and so knew the comparative benets.
It was fascinating to see how h products were sold from a vendor perspective.
h Later, I was approached by Charles Mackey, a well-known gure in the PropTech h sector he founded Hometrack, which is an Automated Valuation Model h (AVM), and sold it to Zoopla in 2017 to work with him on a new company.
h Now Im Chief Data and Technology Ocer at a company called Outra, which h I bill as Britains foremost data consumer behavior, data science company.
h We hold 5000 data points on 30.
7 million households in Britain.
All of it is h GDPR compliant.
PETER JA c C K s S ON 212 h So, Ive worked at a big corporate level in Elgin, an investment management h business.
Ive done utilities and experienced that very strange monopolistic h environment.
Ive h done public sector, and now Im doing fast-scale startup h its a pretty wide scope!
LISA h" : Can you think of an example of how youve used data and AI to fundamentally h# change the way the business runs?
h$ PETER h% : e rst h& thing Ive realized is that, in the early phases, its less about h' technology than anything else.
Youve probably got all the tools you need in h( an organization to make a good start and probably get a very, very long way.
h) ere isnt a magic answer to be had waving a wand and getting the latest h0 piece of technology.
If youve got Power BI thats ne.
If youve got any form h1 of database thats ne, just use it properly.
h2 e second thing I realized is that its actually more about data and AI literacy, h3 culture, vision, and commitment.
A lot of that has to sit with the exec team h4 because when youre asking for budget, you need to have a sensible conversation h5 with them to get their buy-in.
h6 en I think its about having the right operating model, and this isnt technology, h7 its about having the right people in the right place interacting in the right way.
h8 And, if youre truly going to become data enabled, youve got to give those h9 people the power to do it within the operating model.
h@ An example of a data-driven initiative was at Legal & General where I created hA Data Science Bootcamp (it wasnt much to do with data science but I called it hB that to make it sound sexy so people would sign up!
We oered it to everybody.
hC It was an 8-week course that gave employees a basic introduction to data, which hD eventually led to advanced analytics projects.
I asked everyone to bring a use hE case which was fabulous because I got to see everything that everybody wanted hF to do.
At rst, it was very much about training them in how to identify a use hG case, how to create a problem statement, how to start collecting data.
In other hH words, if youre going to move a dataset, youve got to understand where its PETER JA c C K s S ON 213 hI come from, who owns it, what you can and cant use it for, and what the quality hP of that data is for the outcome that you want to achieve.
hQ e rst cohort had 24 people, which I paid for from my group budget.
By the hR time I le, we were running four concurrent courses.
I designed the course hS with NTT DATA (an IT service management company) and they delivered it hT with some of my team and my resources supporting them.
e program was hU so successful that business units were willing to pay for their employees to hV participate.
For me, that was the measure of success.
If they could convince hW their CFO or their hX line manager to pay 1500 bingo!
at is somebody saying hY that this is worthwhile.
h` LISA ha : How did you articulate that benet back to the business?
hb PETER hc : We measured hd success through learning assessments, tracking projects he ROI, and presentations at our biannual data science conferences.
e learning hf assessments we did right at the start meant collecting our metrics with data hg so we could prove some advancement or success.
en we did the learning hh needs assessment at the end, so each individual could assess whether they hi had improved or not.
ey had to relate their learning needs to their role and hp their business unit so they were identifying where it helped.
We then did a hq longitudinal study over the following year, to prove the impact on the business.
hr is was supported by the HR department.
ey loved it because they loved hs the fact that wed set up those metrics and wed done everything right from ht a learning point of view.
hu Tracking the projects that they took back into business looked at the ROI hv when they presented their projects to the wider business in our biannual data hw science conference.
ey were sponsored by Microso and Google and we went hx to their campuses together.
Getting everybody o-site, including all the CEOs hy of all of the lines of business showed the community their support and how h they valued what theyd done.
I was really keen to get some of those products h operational to actually prove the success of the bootcamp.
PETER JA c C K s S ON 214 h Another example was at Elgin, where I went head-to-head with IT on some h projects in the run-up to Brexit.
ere was a big project around fund liquidity h that IT had put in a bid to the change management committee.
I submitted h my own data team bid doing a low-code, no-code approach in half the time h at a third of the budget.
We got the gig and delivered it ahead of time, within h budget.
Proving the power of the possible in an existing use case was incredibly h signicant and really enhanced our credibility.
h LISA h : What do you think is the right operating model for a company starting h to use data and AI?
h PETER h : Its denitely h evolved.
Ten, even ve years ago, the CDO was reporting h to the CTO or the CEO.
It then evolved in many organizations as CDO sitting h alongside the CTO, reporting to the CEO.
I think you see that a lot, particularly in h the big corporations.
Im getting late in my career now, so I can be objectionable h and unreasonable and come out with radical ideas.
h I believe the CDO should have a signicant role in the organization, even i overseeing technology-related decisions.
For instance, when I rst arrived at i Outra, we had a CTO, a chief data scientist, and then me as kind of data and i product leader.
Now its just me the Chief Data and Technology Ocer and I i run everything, from the network and issuing of laptops, to the maintenance of i Outlook.
is morning, I was listening to my data science team talk about how i to use linear regression and twin neural networks in propensity models, and i they were saying they were worried about the big migration were undergoing i at the moment because of maybe asking the data engineering team to do too i much.
I said, Dont worry about that.
Youre all part of the same team.
But sit i next to each other and talk about it.
is model enables us to really move at i speed because I can make three calls, one to my IT manager to say, Right, I i need greater exibility in our AWS resources.
Dont worry about what youre i seeing in the billing because I know whats going on.
I can then talk directly i to my Director of Engineering and say, We need this.
is is the plan for the i next ve days.
is is what needs to go into the next sprint.
And I can talk PETER JA c C K s S ON 215 i to my data scientists and say, You need to talk to the rest of the team about i what it is youre trying to do.
i So that, for me, is the perfect operating model.
But a lot of big corps are a long, i long way from that, with data scientists sitting in an ivory tower, desperate to i have their Power BI or their tableau reports built for them and not knowing i where to go or whom to ask.
Youll have data governance singing a song that i!
nobody is listening i" to, and youll have IT continuing to waste loads of money.
i# LISA i$ : What advice would you give to a company starting to use data and AI?
i% PETER i& : I think i' the key point is that its not all about the technology but the i( operating model and how youre running the business.
Because were a small i) company, under 100 employees, were very exible with our organization and i0 methods.
e structure we use, which I call a layer cake, combines dierent i1 skills for each project.
Its led by the product owner who sits with the sales team, i2 the marketing teams and the go-to-market teams, but also with data engineers, i3 data scientists, all united in a sole mission to deliver the product.
ats how i4 you develop i5 products and get them into production really, really quickly.
i6 LISA i7 : Who sets the priorities in your team?
i8 PETER i9 : As I sit on the i@ executive committee, I work closely with the CEO, the iA COO, Chief Product Ocer and Chief Commercial Ocer to set priorities.
iB I then translate these priorities directly into my own wide-breadth team.
I iC make sure our priorities align completely with our Chief Product Ocer, and iD work with our Chief Commercial Ocer and CEO, to ensure we have the right iE practices and organizational structures.
PETER JA c C K s S ON 216 iF LISA iG : How do you anticipate and respond to change?
iH PETER iI : We havent iP perfected our operating model yet, but the key is to be iQ exible enough to adjust.
Were constantly looking at business process ows, iR ready to break them down and rebuild, if necessary, for instance, weve got a iS workshop coming up to address an issue with one of our process ows this iT week, of course, Ill say, Well, do away with that, well automate all of it!
iU LISA iV : How do you prioritize a use case?
iW PETER iX : In our book, iY Data Driven Business Transformation i` , Caroline Carruthers ia and I discuss a ib multi-dimensional data strategy.
Many people wrongly believe ic that data strategy is linear, in other words, you start with data governance, id then data management, management information, business intelligence, and ie nally data science, and that you cant have your data science until youve if been through that journey.
I fundamentally disagree with this.
You dont ig have to complete A before moving to B.
You can work on multiple elements ih simultaneously, provided youre doing it correctly.
If youre going to do a piece ii of data science, do the fundamentals (data governance and management) right, ip and lay the foundations there for other projects.
In that way, other use cases iq can li o at the same time or later on.
ir LISA is : Can you give examples of how prioritization works at Outra?
it PETER iu : Prioritization iv is really driven by circumstance.
At the moment, at iw Outra, we are completely commercially driven; so the prioritization largely ix depends on what is going to make us the most money, whats going to have iy the largest market impact, or what is fundamental to what we do.
Sometimes, i there are competing priorities, for instance, I had to convince my exec members i about an issue I elevated as a priority around property listings from Zoopla i and RightMove.
I showed them that our models were built from data which i covered only 12% of the market, which created a signicant limitation.
So, I i set a target of above 90% of market coverage.
We then needed to turn that raw PETER JA c C K s S ON 217 i data into gold dust, which we did by address matching.
You can then suddenly i build your models on 93% of market coverage with 78% addresses matched, i compared to the previous limitations of 12% market coverage with 48% of those i addresses matched.
While this didnt directly earn us money, it improved the i quality and scale of our data, enhancing our predictive models and having a i knock-on eect on everything we do.
Were going for hyper-optimization of i features in models, so we needed to go back to the start and say Whats our raw i material?
What are we working with?
It required communication, education, i and a convincing story.
A lot of its about storytelling.
Trying to convince my i colleagues that that was where to start, not to tinker around at the bottom.
i LISA i : What advice would you give to organizations struggling to balance data i governance with other priorities and issues?
i PETER i : ese p organizations face a balancing act between needing to implement p much-needed governance and addressing urgent problems, some of which p arent commercial, such as education and team diversity.
My advice to them p is to prioritize data governance while also tackling urgent matters in the right p way so, as they move into other use cases, the foundations are already there.
p Its not for the data team to set the deliverables, thats for the business.
We can p set up an executive group to make the ultimate decisions.
p LISA p : How do you win over hearts and minds when you rst go into an organization?
p PETER p : ats the p killer question!
When I was working for a sports association, p we started with a data and AI (not digital) maturity assessment.
It examined 12 p points of the data ecosystem, only one of which is technology, the other 11 are p things like behaviors, frameworks, policies, governance, leadership.
I played p that back to the deputy CEO and the CEO, and the common denominator that p emerged across all the business units was that there was a lack of trust in the p data due to poor data governance.
So, I showed them how good governance p could address this trust issue and prevent conicts over gures, using specic p case studies.
In my previous role at Elgin, I got data issues onto the enterprise PETER JA c C K s S ON 218 p risk register, and data governance was the solution.
All of a sudden you get p!
the Chief Risk Ocer and the CEO very interested in how data governance p" p# can solve this risk and this problem.
Key Takeaways : Consider the Chief Data Ocer as a signicant role in the organization, beyond just managing data.
is role can be a strategic accelerator, leading the transformation of data into value to drive the organizations growth and innovation, managing risks, and enhancing agility and competitive advantage.
Building a data-driven culture : Emphasize data literacy, foster a culture of data-driven decision-making, have a clear vision and commitment.
ese considerations are more important than just focusing on technology and need to be championed by the executive team, especially when budget allocations are being discussed.
An eective operating model involves having the right people interacting in the right way.
is includes having data scientists, IT managers, and directors of engineering working together as part of the same team.
Prioritize data governance : Address poor data governance urgently because a lack of trust in the data can lead to internal friction.
Demonstrate to the Chief Risk Ocer and the CEO how data governance can be a solution to data risk.
Prioritize data governance alongside addressing urgent commercial matters.
Internal training : Empower employees and enhance change management with a program of training.
Start with a basic introduction to data and lead to AI projects.
Train employees on how to identify a use case, create a problem statement, and start collecting data.
PETER JA c C K s S ON 219 : Collaborate closely with the CEO, the COO, CPO, and CCO to set priorities, which are translated directly into the team.
Be exible, continuously review business process ows, and redesign if necessary.
Prioritize according to real-world circumstances, such as whats going to make the most money, whats going to have the largest market impact, and strengthening the core foundations of the business.
Power of storytelling : Tell a compelling story about what is possible to inspire colleagues and prioritize issues.
221 21 M M ark B B eckwith Director of Data Governance and Architecture at the Financial Times pv AI has brought us to an interesting point.
As we leverage pw this new technology, we need to balance our ambitions with px mitigating potential risk via well-thought-out governance.
py An incredibly valuable byproduct of the emergence of AI is p the increased awareness of the importance of establishing p robust and reliable foundational data capabilities.
Im looking p forward to helping advance our organizational culture around p data, part of which will be to challenge the perception that p governance is just about compliance.
In fact, its core to value p generation because its intrinsically linked to the data p p value chain.
LinkedIn: mark-beckwith-9603551 p M M ARK B B E c C KWITH 222 p Mark Beckwith p is the Director of Data Governance and Architecture at the p Financial Times, having joined the business in 2012.
Prior to this he was p the Head of Database Marketing at Domestic and General and has worked p extensively in data and analytics for companies including Royal Mail and p Ford Motor Company.
p LISA p : Tell us about your team at the Financial Times and how the business p model has evolved.
q MARK q : e FT Group, part q of Nikkei Inc.
, employs more than 2,300 people q worldwide, including 700 journalists in 40 countries.
It includes the Financial q Times, FT Specialist, and a number of services and joint ventures.
Most of q our employees work in London, New York, Hong Kong, Manila, and, more q recently, Soa in Bulgaria, which has become a tech and data hub since being q established in 2018.
q Today, our revenues from content (via subscriptions) or advertising are weighted q toward digital.
We have a paid circulation of just under 1.
2 million across q digital and print, including those who pay for individual access and corporate q licenses for organizations.
As pioneers of the paid subscription model in the q early 2000s, we took a metered approach, oering a free sample of limited q content before having to pay.
at model has, and continues to, evolve, and q includes annual and monthly subscription packages, as well as low-cost entry q trial subscriptions q that move to full-price subscriptions aer a short period.
q LISA q : How has the data function evolved?
q MARK q : When I joined q!
the FT 12 years ago, data capabilities were dispersed q" across multiple teams, which included a data engineering arm, a business q# intelligence team that focused on reporting, web analytics, an emerging data q$ science capability, as well as database marketing, which I joined to head up.
q% Increased demand for data resulted in growth across all these disciplines then, q& when Nikkei acquired the FT from Pearson in 2015, the director of the data M M ARK B B E c C KWITH 223 q' area joined the board as Chief Data Ocer (CDO) with the remit to develop q( not only our data capability but to also spearhead the business becoming more q) data-driven.
One example of this was putting data and insight into the hands of q0 journalists.
is was a novelty then but now its a very dierent story, with roles q1 in the editorial team focused on using data to better understand our readership q2 and how content is cutting through to particular cohorts and demographics, q3 such as female readers, which continues to be a focus for editorial.
q4 Back in 2015, our CEO John Ridding sought to get the whole business behind q5 a north star metric.
We created an engagement score, which combined recency q6 and frequency of reader visits as well as the volume of content consumed with q7 the premise that increasing engagement with our content likely translates to q8 long(er)-term paying subscribers.
q9 LISA q@ : How did the engagement score inuence the companys operations?
qA MARK qB : We set targets qC based on the number of engaged readers and these metrics qD became integral to our operations and a component of our companys bonus qE scheme.
Getting this embedded across the whole organization took roughly qF three years of immense eort and dedication as we needed to establish the qG metric, communicate it across the business, and get it baked into peoples qH objectives and targets.
With the engagement score universally understood qI and supported, we then found ourselves regularly attempting to translate this qP insight into actual value.
How much are these highly engaged users worth to qQ us in pounds, dollars, euros, or other currencies?
is is how LTV (Lifetime qR Value) was born which is an estimation of how much revenue a customer will qS generate for the business over the life of that relationship.
Also called customer qT lifetime value (CLV, or CLTV), this is a critical metric for a company trying qU to gauge the cost eciency of acquiring new customers and supporting them qV over time.
It built on our engagement model by including a monetary value qW dimension.
For example, over a three-year period, how many of these people qX were likely to stick around and how much would they pay over that time, and qY voil!
q` you have LTV.
Any new product initiative was then assessed qa using qb this new LTV framework.
M M ARK B B E c C KWITH 224 qc LISA qd : What are the key challenges that you face today?
qe MARK qf : My teams key qg challenge is to maximize the potential to create value from qh our data.
By engaging the business, we aim to make continuous improvements qi to the quality, reliability, and useability of the data that we generate or procure.
qp is is essential in order to meet the FTs current and future needs.
e teams qq eorts are critical to the future success of our data and analytics capabilities qr and, therefore, the organization as a whole.
It involves working closely with qs product and technology, commercial, editorial, and legal colleagues at all levels qt in the organization.
qu A practical example of this is developing a comprehensive understanding of qv the data we have within the FT data about our data.
Knowing what data we qw have and where it lives is great but how we extract value from this is by having qx a clear understanding of how that data ows through our organization and how qy it powers our products and processes.
I was just writing a paper today about q the benets of data lineage in our product development process.
q LISA q : Can you expand more on the data lineage challenge?
q MARK q : Companies q now have an insatiable appetite to get more and richer q data, which is great, but it oen happens in a very organic and unstructured q way, which we have been partially guilty of.
As a result, weve denitely got an q opportunity to up the ante in terms of improving our data maturity, in this case, q how we acquire and utilize our data across the entirety of our organization.
For q instance, we didnt have a data catalog, which makes life for anyone wishing q to get access to, use, and understand our data, much harder!
q In January 2023, when the news was full of the ransomware incidents suered by q e Guardian and Royal Mail, this increased an already heightened awareness of q a potential future data breach.
is turned out to be quite helpful in promoting q the need to have better data about our data, held within a centralized data q catalog.
While weve made a good start, tackling risk, people will really sit up q and take note when it starts to deliver value.
is is where the importance of q lineage comes in.
Being able to trace how our data ows through our organization M M ARK B B E c C KWITH 225 q will help us bring products to market quicker, whilst also providing a means r to impact trace, in other words, to understand the impact of changes on our r data r ecosystem, so we make those changes with our eyes open in terms of the r cost of those changes.
r LISA r : How have you been tackling this challenge in data lineage?
r MARK r : As I mentioned, weve r now had some really good traction in establishing r a centralized catalog of our data, and the explosion of AI has really helped here, r as the old saying of garbage in, garbage out, has never been truer.
So, I am r leveraging this in terms of helping to make more people aware of the need to r ensure that the data underpinning our AI eorts is reliable and of high quality.
r Were not unique in the sense that the journey our data takes, from source r to report, involves multiple systems and teams.
However, if you think of the r whole end-to-end data chain, were only as strong as our weakest link, so if r youve got one team with stellar data governance practices, its futile if others r dont have anything.
So, my team has been focused on developing a holistic r capability to enable us to map the entire data journey.
Were now beginning r to see signicant progress with this rst step.
r LISA r!
: How important was the sponsorship of what you were doing from a r" leadership perspective?
r# MARK r$ : It was vital.
e r% presence of a Data Governance Council, established in r& 2017 (largely made up of board members) has been a huge help.
One initiative r' in particular that has benetted from their sponsorship, has been the creation r( of an always on/BAU data mapping capability within my area.
It was something r) that both my team, as well as compliance, felt was worthy of incremental r0 investment, to ensure we had a systematic way to address any blind spots r1 we had in terms of what data we had, who owned it, how it was being used, r2 and so on.
As we continue to develop our data governance capabilities, that r3 sponsorship will remain vitally important, especially when trying to address r4 any potential gaps in data r5 ownership/stewardship.
M M ARK B B E c C KWITH 226 r6 LISA r7 : What would be your key learning from working with data and AI?
r8 MARK r9 : One thing I learned r@ quite early on at the FT from which I got a lot rA of condence and traction, was seeking out advocates in unexpected places.
rB For instance, our B2C marketing director, not closely tied to data, became rC instrumental in pushing our data-focused agenda.
is happened when I rD provided a high-level, accessible piece of analysis of the impact of replacing one rE propensity model with another.
Much of this analysis was caveated with some rF assumptions thrown in, but she said, I think your best guess is better than rG anything else were gonna get, so lets go with it.
I thought, Wow, because the rH eort that Id put in prior to that in terms of making the work understandable rI and focused on what she cared most about, really paid o.
rP Another lesson I learned is the power of simplicity in explaining complex rQ concepts to make them accessible, which is vital if youre going to get people rR to come on the journey with you.
So, I consistently emphasize to my team the rS value of repetition and simplication in communication, regardless of the rT audience.
Some people may be uncomfortable with simplication because rU they fear it makes what they do sound easy.
But, in fact, its quite the opposite.
rV eres an Einstein quote that the denition of genius is taking the complex rW and making it simple.
You might be really smart and know all the technical rX details of something, but can you describe it to someone who doesnt really rY understand it?
ats my mantra.
r` LISA ra : What are you excited about next?
rb MARK rc : AI has brought rd us to an interesting point where, as I said before, it has re shone a light on the importance of ensuring the data that feeds these models rf is up to scratch and well understood.
Weve had some good early traction on rg this with the development of our data catalog, but weve got a lot of runway rh ahead of us.
is is exciting as it is a multi-year challenge that I feel will be ri transformational for the business and, from a personal standpoint, something rp that will enable me to continue learning and developing.
M M ARK B B E c C KWITH 227 rq Another thing Im excited about is tackling the misconceptions about governance rr and demystifying the notion that governance is all stick and no carrot that will rs slow the business down and cost more.
Im looking forward to helping advance rt our organizational culture around data, part of which will be to challenge the ru perception that governance is just about compliance.
In fact, its core to value rv generation because rw its intrinsically linked to the data value chain.
' Key Takeaways ' ( ( Data and AI function evolution ( : Support the data functions evolution from ( fragmented ( silos to an integrated hub-and-spoke model.
Establish a lean ( center of excellence to guide and optimize data and AI practices, ensuring ( ecient resource allocation and strong data foundations.
Empower data-driven ( decision-making by embedding hands-on analytics teams directly within ( business units.
Incentivize continuous improvement by acknowledging and ( rewarding the data and AI functions achievements.
) ) ) Data catalog and lineage ) : Prioritize the development and maintenance of ) a centralized ) data catalog to enhance data quality, security, and compliance, ) and enable data lineage to track the origin, transformation, and usage of data.
) ) ) Data governance council 0 : Establish a 0 data governance council with the 0 authority and resources to balance the potential commercial benets with 0 data privacy, security, and ethical considerations.
Align data practices with 0 your organizations values and reputation.
0 0 0 Data mapping 0 : Map data to 0 mitigate risks such as breaches and losses, and 1 lay groundwork for a more secure and ecient data environment.
Identify 1 and document all data sources within your organization, along with the ow 1 and transformations throughout the systems.
Support the data function in 1 securing the necessary funding and resources to complete this task.
M M ARK B B E c C KWITH 228 1 1 1 Invest in data engineering 1 : Invest in 1 a strong data engineering team to build 1 and maintain a data platform that handles collection, analysis, and reporting 2 eciently.
Align and integrate this team with the data science and insights 2 teams to 2 ensure eective collaboration to deploy AI solutions.
2 2 2 Power of simplicity and repetition 2 : Communicate complex concepts eectively, 2 using simplicity and repetition, and seek out advocates in the business.
229 2 22 2 K K shira Saagar 3 Data Science at Wolt and Doordash s1 Data science is 85% change management and 15% actual s2 technology.
Its becoming easier and easier anybody can s3 pretty much build an algorithm and there are all kinds of s4 generative AI coming but getting human beings to believe s5 in it and use it is the hard part.
3 LinkedIn: 3 kshirasaagar s8 Ks KS HIRA SAAGAR 230 s9 Kshira Saagar s@ has worked in analytics and data science worldwide.
He has built sA global teams and created data and AI solutions in retail, banking, consumer sB goods, telecom, and insurance verticals for leading Fortune 100 clients.
He is sC currently DoorDashs rst Head of International Data Science.
Prior to this, sD he was Latitudes rst Chief Data Ocer and served as the inaugural Director sE of Data Science for THE ICONIC, part of the Global Fashion Group.
Besides sF his corporate engagements, Kshira serves on several advisory boards for AI sG and data startups.
sH LISA sI : How do you see your role in data and AI?
sP KSHIRA sQ : I used to sR call myself the lost and found guy.
I try to nd answers sS using data through algorithms, dashboards, analysis, and more, to help people sT make decisions.
Obviously, people have been making decisions with less data sU and largely based on assumptions for years, but now, just making one small, sV smart decision based on accurate data is going to give you the edge and allow sW you to do smarter things.
I like to think of myself as a builder of teams and trust sX because you cant work with data alone.
You need smart people to create value.
sY LISA s` : What is your role now and how did you get here?
sa KSHIRA sb : I started as sc a consultant solving point problems using data science.
sd en I worked with various companies, including Gilt Groupe, Zappos, and se Marks & Spencer in the UK, solving challenges in website functionality and sf email personalization in the 2000s and early 2010s.
en, when I moved to sg Australia, it was like being in a time machine with a ve-year lag, so I found sh myself being asked to repeat everything I had done years before, so it was si fun.
en I worked as the Chief Data Ocer for a bank, and now Im with sp DoorDash, taking care of their international sq markets outside the US, which sr is 27 countries.
Ks KS HIRA SAAGAR 231 ss LISA st : What business problems were you trying to solve?
su KSHIRA sv : Most problems sw focused on making customers lives easier.
For example, sx in Marks & Spencers case, we aimed to enhance the online shopping experience sy by showing customers the right products or guiding them to the right page, s or sending only the most relevant emails at the right time.
We also worked s on operational eciency, in areas like supply chain and warehousing, asking, s How do we save money doing smarter things at scale?
s LISA s : In the companies youve worked for, was analytics always a part of the s corporate strategy or were you a sideline trying to get in?
s KSHIRA s : Early on s in my career, I was lucky enough to work in places where s people recognized the need to do things dierently and take a data-driven s approach, but the challenges oen lie in using new technologies eectively.
s For instance, I worked in one company where they had spent tens of millions s on a massive automation to run the warehouse but didnt know how to utilize s it.
Buying expensive technology is not fun.
You could buy a Ferrari, but if you s dont know how to drive it, its going to sit in your garage.
And thats pretty s much what that automation did.
ey threw it at the data people to gure s out, probably thinking it was an unwinnable challenge.
But thats the kind s of challenge I love.
So, my approach was, lets bring in a set of smart people, s and gure out how to use the automation to scale picking and packing of s products.
And we did it 40 times better than a human could.
I oen nd I t get a problem that management thinks is a hopeless case.
To prove this wrong, t it really makes a dierence when you have a seat at the C-suite table versus t when you eventually get given the leovers and asked to solve the problem.
Ks KS HIRA SAAGAR 232 t LISA t : When youve joined companies, have you found the data foundations t already set up and what was the quality like?
t KSHIRA t : Its been a t spectrum of everything across projects.
Sometimes the data t was muddy or unclean, or people didnt trust it.
My approach was to peel back t the layers and nd the valuable nuggets within.
Im a big believer in done is t better than perfect so I start with what we have and make progress instead t of waiting for perfection.
By demonstrating the potential on the back of an t envelope, we oen gained support and resources to improve further.
I believe t everyone wants to solve a problem; they sometimes just dont know how to go t about it.
If you tell them, is is where you need to go and this is what I need t to get you there, then people are more than willing to come and help you.
t LISA t : Can you tell me about your work process and what resistance you t have encountered?
t KSHIRA t!
: Technology is t" not the challenge; trust is the challenge.
So, in the t# beginning, its more about convincing people that this is a problem that can be t$ solved with data and getting their buy-in because the technical hurdles can be t% overcome through iteration.
Weve had success in creating eective algorithms, t& but the real challenge lies in convincing people to adopt their output.
For instance, t' we designed an optimal pick path algorithm in a warehouse that would use the t( latest OR-Tools (Operations Research Tools), with a 25% saving on resources t) but, due to its lack of intuitiveness, it faced pushback from long-time workers.
t0 For example, the supervisor said, Ive been running warehouses for 25 years, t1 dont tell me how to do my job.
To win them over, our data scientists would t2 walk with them, show them the model, and incorporate their inputs into it.
t3 e ultimate goal is for the stakeholders to view it as their algorithm and their t4 model a tool that they understand, trust, and can eectively use.
t5 In essence, data science is 85% change management and 15% actual technology.
t6 Its becoming easier and easier anybody can pretty much build an algorithm t7 and there are all kinds of generative AI coming but getting human beings t8 to believe in it and use it is the hard part.
Ks KS HIRA SAAGAR 233 t9 LISA t@ : Whats been the biggest challenge that youve faced?
tA KSHIRA tB : e more tC human interfaces involved, the harder the problem.
An tD industry such as fashion, with its highly subjective and artistic character, poses tE the most challenges.
Trying to tell the most creative artistic buyer how they tF should buy clothing is tough.
We try to resolve this by augmenting rather than tG automating, emphasizing that we are there to assist them by providing data- tH backed recommendations.
So, wed say, We know that with this particular tI shirt, this is how deep you should buy, this is when it will run out, this is how tP long the lead time is and therefore this is why you should buy it.
We recommend tQ you buy this, but what do you think?
Its a question of guring out how to tR work with people who are not technical or data-driven and get them to come tS along with you on the journey.
tT I think the most important thing is understanding that the process is not tU merely about handling numbers or algorithms.
Its about transforming these tV into meaningful actions that can drive a business forward.
Leveraging data tW and AI in business operations tX demands a unique balance of technical know- tY how, creativity, and the ability to work with a diverse team.
t` LISA ta : In your past projects, did you start from a business case, or did you have tb to build it?
tc KSHIRA td : Starting from te a business case, instead of a data or technology problem, tf can set the project on the right path from the start.
Data should serve to answer tg crucial business questions and facilitate decision-making.
Our starting point th was usually known ineciencies that needed to be addressed.
While this gave ti us the freedom to tackle the issues, it also presented the challenge of dening tp the precise nature of the problem.
As we progressed, we realized that using tq tools was not necessarily a superior solution; the real metric for success could tr be achieving the same result with fewer resources.
Ks KS HIRA SAAGAR 234 ts LISA tt : How do you get the right resources behind you and build a team?
tu KSHIRA tv : My approach tw is akin to a freemium model demonstrating the tx potential of a solution with a small-scale, tangible example.
For instance, if its ty an optimization algorithm trying to solve a problem, I might do one country or t one region or one product and say, See, this is what we can do.
I can give you t this, but I need one or two people to solve it.
In my experience, showcasing t results consistently helped me secure resources.
If people can see a proof of t concept not just a talk or a presentation then theyre happy to support.
t Ive oen struggled to work with technology teams, especially engineering folks, t who would happily collect data but were not concerned about how it would t be used.
is was particularly prevalent about 15 years ago when working in t clusters was a popular approach.
So, when I started running my own data teams, t I insisted that they were responsible for the complete data lifecycle collecting, t storing, processing, and using data I built full stack data teams.
is creates a t unied, cooperative t environment, reducing friction and fostering team spirit.
t LISA t : Where have you had the most impact?
t KSHIRA t : Id say its in t making the entire business more ecient.
I take the t nancial P&L approach to solving a problem, giving each team their own line t item to answer the challenge.
is helps each team understand how their work t directly inuences the businesss bottom line, keeping them motivated and u the company protable.
u For example, if one teams job is only looking at, say, labor cost, this team will u just optimize labor cost and theyll try to build all the relevant algorithms.
u If the other teams job is just to improve the basket size, they will just focus u on that.
ey can say, Im not just building a faceless algorithm, my work u actually moves this line and therefore we are protable by this much and we u are very proud of it.
Ks KS HIRA SAAGAR 235 u Ive tried iterations with one person doing multiple roles; they can do the data u engineering part, be a data scientist, and build a dashboard.
But its very rare u to nd people like that and very hard to scale.
Instead, we build a team with u dierent skills, a mix of data engineers, data scientists, and business analysts.
u ey can interface with dierent parts of the business but solve the same u problem.
ats a full stack team and it denitely works better.
u LISA u : Have you had to abandon a project for any reason?
u KSHIRA u : Yes, in the u nancial services sector, we began developing algorithms to u predict credit scores before applications.
It was an incredibly accurate tool, but u we stopped midway due to ethical concerns and because we saw some people u were interested in what we considered to be potential misuse of it.
ere were a lot of passionate social justice champions on the team, and they u" will not build or work on something which they feel could be misused.
u# LISA u$ : What advice would you give to companies on achieving value from data u% and AI?
u& KSHIRA u' : Start with u( the business problem you need to solve, not the data or u) technology.
Ive worked with a lot of leaders who get really excited about a u0 new technology solution, but it may not align with the business strategy or u1 contribute to eciency.
Blindly following technology trends isnt the answer.
u2 e key is to identify the business problem rst and then work backward, u3 exploring data-driven solutions.
Otherwise, even substantial investments may u4 result in unused technology.
Ks KS HIRA SAAGAR 236 u5 LISA u6 : Is there anything that comes to mind that you would do dierently now?
u7 KSHIRA u8 : About 10 years u9 ago, when we were big advocates for open source, u@ we had to roll out a data dashboard project, but we focused too much on the uA destination and not enough on the journey.
I learned that whether its your uB own team or the enterprise, everyone wants to be on the journey.
So now, uC I prioritize keeping everyone involved and informed, balancing pace with uD inclusivity, to ensure a shared sense of accomplishment and understanding.
uE Knowing that people want to feel that their voice is heard has fundamentally uF changed how I operate.
uG LISA uH : Has there been a failure thats gone on to equip you for success?
uI KSHIRA uP : Yes, we once uQ over-engineered a marketing attribution model which uR led to ridiculous results (10,000 ROI on $15) because we got lost in the details.
uS If you start going too deep and too granular, people dont nd value in it.
It uT was a great lesson in knowing when to stop.
Its about balancing mathematical uU accuracy with practical usefulness.
People need clear, actionable insights, not uV overly complex reports.
uW LISA uX : What excites you the most about data and AI now?
uY KSHIRA u` : I love ua getting to be part of what I call moving line items on a P&L.
ub And for this to happen, I believe there needs to be a close partnership between uc business and data teams in the future.
We cant just build tech solutions and walk ud away; instead, by working together we can signicantly drive business growth.
ue Secondly, the potential to use data science and AI to streamline work and uf uncover ineciencies is incredibly exciting.
By minimizing repetitive tasks, ug we can focus on solving more complex and interesting problems.
Ks KS HIRA SAAGAR 237 uh LISA ui : Whats your top tip for someone embarking on their data and AI up journey today?
uq KSHIRA ur : One us thing I tell the C-suite is to make room at the decision-making ut table for your data folks and make sure that the people who sit at the table uu are also leading those data teams.
View them as value generators.
Hold them uv accountable for generating and delivering tangible value for the organization.
W Key Takeaways W W X Focus on the people, not just the tech X : Invest in working alongside people to X understand their workows in detail in order to demonstrate how data and AI X can augment, not replace, high value processes.
Its important to understand X that deriving value from data and AI is not merely about handling numbers X or algorithms.
X X X Build-measure-learn cycle X : Take a nancial P&L lens to solve a problem, Y by assigning each team their own line item to answer the challenge.
Adopt a Y build-measure-learn cycle to keep eorts aligned building the solution, Y tracking its impact, and constant improvement.
Y Y Y Full stack teams Y : Deploy a full-stack team approach with dierent skills, Y including data engineers, data scientists, and analysts collaborating on the Y entire data lifecycle.
Full-stack teams can interface with dierent parts of the Y business but solve the same problem.
` ` ` Building usable AI solutions ` : Start with the business problem to be solved, ` not the data or technology.
Ensure AI solutions directly address specic ` business needs, to avoid investments in solutions that are unused.
Ensure the ` output meets a specic business need to avoid it becoming unused despite ` substantial investment.
Prioritize keeping everyone involved and informed, ` balancing pace with inclusivity, to ensure a shared sense of accomplishment ` and understanding.
Ks KS HIRA SAAGAR 238 a a a Balance rigor with practical human logic a : Avoid over-engineering a model, a balancing mathematical rigor with practical human logic to solve the problem a at hand.
Understand the pros and cons of each method or algorithm.
a a a Integrate AI expertise in the C-suite a : Establish a close partnership between b business, and data and AI teams.
Integrate AI expertise into the C-suite, b holding them accountable for delivering tangible value to the organization.
b View data and AI expertise as a value generator.
JOE R R OMATA 240 v9 Joe Romata v@ is the Global Head of Customer Experience at a multinational vA energy company.
He has driven customer-centric digital transformations at a vB variety of companies, from blue-chip multinationals to tech startups.
vC LISA vD : Tell us about your career journey to date.
vE JOE vF : Following my vG time as a Deloitte consultant, I worked at a MarTech startup.
vH Now Im working for a multinational energy company as the Global Head of vI Customer Experience, looking at customer insights and analytics, channel vP strategy, and all the customer experience capability programs across the group.
vQ Since 2008, I worked across a broad set of business challenges including vR operating models, business process improvements, digital strategy, customer vS strategy, customer journeys, personas, customer insights, and analytics.
en I vT started looking at the data to get the right insights for the business, reporting, vU exploration, and root cause analysis.
vV When I joined MarTech, the company was looking at using AI, back when it vW was a machine learning capability rather than generative AI.
We were guring vX out how to create marketing content and how to test it across channels to drive vY conversion.
I worked on dierent campaigns with marketing departments v` from Google to Hotel.
I was a solutions consultant as well as an account va manager setting up scalable processes.
vb Aer the MarTech startup, I was headhunted into my current role in 2018 vc working for a multinational energy company to drive the customer-centricity vd agenda across the organization.
Until then, the company had been quite a ve traditional product-led organization, not really customer-led.
My initial task was vf to transform their Voice of e Customer program and generate the right insight.
vg When I joined, customer experience was just about one score of satisfaction, vh with no insights, and nobody knew what the improvement areas or key pain vi points were.
e data was all over the place.
I successfully transferred my role vp to leverage the latest technology.
So, now weve got lagging indicators, which vq give us more information about what has happened, as well as lagging and JOE R R OMATA 241 vr predictive insights, which are improving all the time.
ese help product teams vs drive enhancements across the customer platforms.
Were looking at employee vt experience metrics as well.
e next step is linking all these customer and vu employee measurements to business performance.
Hopefully, well get there!
vv In addition to that, I led the work on building our internal customer experience vw capabilities.
What that means is establishing a common language, common vx training, and for everyone to understand the customer journeys.
By encouraging vy a deeper appreciation of the customer experience, we can design processes that v truly prioritize customer impact.
v Most recently, I dened our omnichannel strategy and looked at the transformation v program for next year.
Weve got limited resources and eorts so, where do v we want to focus?
What are the key use cases that will move the needle and v prove the value, and then scale?
v Its all based v around data and data-driven values.
My role in the energy sector v is unique.
Unlike most positions that focus on a single business line, I have a v broad scope, similar to our downstream director, working across all our B2B v and B2C businesses.
v LISA v : Can you give an example of a specic problem youve solved with data v and AI?
v JOE v : I pioneered an v omnichannel customer experience measurement aiming v to save $40 million in costs, so thats a nice number.
e challenge was that v product teams relied on anecdotal discussions rather than having systematic v insights.
e solution I developed was analyzing data from our strategic B2B and v B2C platforms, like the energy companys equivalent of Amazon (eCommerce, w CVPS service platforms customer value propositions as a servicing platform) w to identify customer pain points.
ese were across product ranges from w traditional fuels to new energy solutions.
JOE R R OMATA 242 w To do this wasnt straightforward.
We had to ensure a robust data foundation w which starts with identifying what and where elements of customer data link w to various points in the customer journey.
Basic data, like order history, was w oen missing, hindering our ability to gain an accurate view of the customer.
w We have just started merging data from siloed systems and improving the data w quality, then we w can access meaningful customer insights.
w LISA w : When you started working at the energy company, how was data organized w and how did you change it?
w JOE w : Up until 2019, the w businesss attitude was very much, We make a product w and they will buy it, so the business wasnt thinking about what customers w really need.
en, there was the realization that when competing with startups w and in some sectors, such as home electrics and home electricity charging, w which were becoming saturated, you actually have to compete dierently.
w To create an organizational cultural shi, we needed to pay more attention to w!
measuring outcomes and customer success.
Additionally, we needed customer w" insights to understand our dierent customers needs and how to meet them.
w# ere are dierent sources for these insights, including market research, account w$ managers, and frontline colleagues; however, they were not systematically measured.
w% When I joined the company, the way we measured customer experience was w& with one metric of how satised are you?
or would you recommend the w' company?
ere were no material insights.
ere were some verbatim questions, w( but without technology that enables you to analyze them, there was no one w) really to look at them.
We had gathered feedback but nothing was done with w0 it, so none of those insights were used.
w1 Colleagues [at the energy company] wanted to build something and grow the w2 business and work out what to focus on to really move the needle.
We needed w3 baseline data about the customer so we could actually measure and report w4 eectively.
We had some anecdotal understanding of where pain points might w5 be, so we started measuring where we could make fast improvements.
JOE R R OMATA 243 w6 We didnt have rened customer journey maps back then, so we had to rely w7 on the key moments.
For one of our strategic platforms, our customer insight w8 was dispersed, so we had to logically think about where we should start.
Is w9 it the login process, or is it the ordering process, is it the invoicing process?
w@ We teased out the key pain points across the platform informed by customer wA feedback and deployed text wB analytics capability to mine customer comments wC verbatim.
is gave us context to the score.
wD LISA wE : How did you make a plan and what were the key things you needed to wF deliver initial value to the business?
wG JOE wH : One of the wI most important assessments we performed was to identify wP the programs value proposition for our internal business users and in turn wQ our customers.
To achieve this, we interviewed our internal business users to wR understand their challenges and educated them on the value of the program wS in addressing those challenges.
wT Next, to create a customer prole, we started by breaking down the programs wU key components of the customer data and understanding what value could be wV gotten out of them without asking another 50 questions.
en we tagged the wW data to ensure measurement points throughout the customer journey.
wX At each stage, we had to engage with dierent teams, data management, wY analytics, data privacy, and GDPR compliance to work out what we wanted w` to use for the system.
To establish the right data foundations, we needed to wa get an appropriate vendor to support and develop the right roadmap for the wb next two, three, four, ve years.
wc We needed a culture change to deploy new ways of working.
We embedded wd insights into dierent everyday forums and discussions.
We made a shi from we a waterfall approach to more iterative cycles informed by these insights.
JOE R R OMATA 244 wf LISA wg : Have you started to work with generative AI?
wh JOE wi : We are wp integrating more generative AI into our channel management.
In wq fact, its forecast to reduce Average Handle Time (AHT) by 20%.
wr LISA ws : What strategies did you use to overcome resistance and get everyone wt behind you?
wu JOE wv : e number ww one thing that worked really well, which I learned from wx consulting, is to understand the business end users angle.
Whats in it for wy them?
What I mean by that is that each business user is interested in their w function and specic challenges.
w For the product teams, we created a dashboard they could use internally to w understand what they build and how that impacts customers.
Quotes and w feedback from customers helped bring insights and customer personas to life, w and helped the team understand all the interlinks and potential benets for w product improvements.
w For the sales team, once they understood how we could resolve the customer w pain points, they had more time and success in sales conversion.
w e other key to success is strong leadership support.
ey understood the w value, and, once I got their buy-in I had the support to go ahead.
is reinforced w the approach to leveraging insights, which are now readily and intuitively w accessible for users as needed.
w LISA w : How did you align disparate data sources?
w JOE w : We used tools w to pool data from dierent sources.
e data didnt sit in a w warehouse but was set in dierent systems.
We had SAP CRM and Salesforce.
w We had the digital platforms or customer platforms, and we pulled the data w together, manipulated it, and then provided it in the most appropriate format x for our purposes.
We had a data lake program in process, but we couldnt wait x for completion before commencing this work.
JOE R R OMATA 245 Key Takeaways : Ensure strong data foundations with the right data points readily available to connect customer interactions across all touchpoints.
Optimize data quality and accessibility to gain a comprehensive understanding of customers.
Breakdown silos, merging data across dierent departments in collaboration with data management, analytics, data privacy, and GDPR compliance teams.
Culture of customer-centric measurement : Augment cultural shi to eectively measure customer experience including customer satisfaction, capturing eciency-driving insights, and embedding them into daily work and decision-making forums.
Include customer feedback, which is oen overlooked.
Leverage insights to not only improve customer experience but also reduce operational costs and inform the strategic implementation of AI.
Adopt iterative work cycles that are informed by customer data, allowing for continuous renement and adaptation.
Building buy-in and momentum : Take a multi-pronged strategic approach.
Understand the business end users perspective and their challenges.
Empower product teams with data that helps them understand the impact of their work on customers and potential improvements.
Increase sales conversion by providing data to the sales teams, so they can understand and address customer pain points.
Win leadership support by demonstrating the value of the work.
247 24 T T omasz U U llman Former Global Head of Data Science and Strategy at Ford Pro x8 AI and machine learning are based on probabilities.
eres x9 no certainty.
We are building probabilistic models.
We x@ underestimated the challenge that this would pose.
You need xA to make sure that C-level executives understand both the xB power and limitations that data science, AI, and machine xC learning can oer.
LinkedIn: v xF T T OMA s S Z Ull ULL MAN 248 xG Tomasz Ullman xH is the Commercial Director at RAC.
At the time of this interview, xI he was responsible for Global Data Science and Strategy at Ford Pro Tech Data xP and Analytics.
Prior to this, he was the Senior Analytics Manager at Lloyds xQ Bank and a Manager at Deloitte.
He has extensive experience in leading large- xR scale commercial and data science initiatives.
xS LISA xT : Can you tell us about your career up to now?
xU TOMASZ xV : Currently, Im Head xW of Data Science at Ford Pro, a business unit xX within Ford Motor Company that focuses on commercial customers.
ats xY everyone from self-employed plumbers to massive global eets for Amazon.
Its x` vehicles and, as we move to battery electric vehicles (BEVs), its also increasingly xa charging.
Soware and what we call productivity tools are also becoming a xb big part of the experience of vehicle usage.
Were creating the productivity xc tools around the vehicle that help businesses focus on whats really important xd to them.
So, its service and parts nancing, using data science and analytics xe solutions for those dierent verticals.
Some of it is to help executives and xf leaders of those verticals to make informed decisions and be smarter, while xg some of our initiatives focus on building data-driven products that we can xh then oer to customers.
xi Prior to my current role, I was the Smart Mobility Analytics Lead for Ford xp in Europe, focusing on future mobility solutions.
Data was a big part of this xq as we were designing all kinds of solutions for anything to do with mobility, xr so it included solutions for cities and insurance companies as well as vehicles xs and public transport, as well as micro-mobility like scooters and e-bicycles.
xt Before that, I spent a couple of years at Lloyds Banking Group in their marketing xu analytics xv function, leading a brand analytics team.
And before that, I was at xw Monitor Deloitte.
T T OMA s S Z Ull ULL MAN 249 xx LISA xy : Could you give an example of how you navigated using data within one x of the companies you worked for?
x TOMASZ x : When I x was part of Ford Mobility, it operated a bit like a consultancy x for cities.
Public transport organizations like Transport for London are oen x public institutions, so they can be slow-moving, which presents its own set x of challenges.
x is particular piece of work we did in 2019 was in London where theres lots x of legislation around congestion charges and restrictions on large goods vehicle x lorries, which are seven and a half tons or more.
ese massive lorries are only x allowed to go on predened major roads through all 32 London boroughs x unless they have specic permission to use smaller roads.
If they dont comply, x there should be a penalty, but in 2019, there was no enforcement mechanism x for this; so, unless the police happened to be driving right behind them, there x were no penalties issued.
x One borough came to us and asked, Could you help us design, build, and x implement a solution to help us enforce this legislation?
e things that we x had at our disposal were data and data science.
ey wanted to invest in a x network of cameras that would help track vehicles movements.
ey wanted x analytics and a data science engine to be integrated with their ticket-issuing y system to allow them to operationalize it.
y It couldnt be enforced with a simple one-spot camera, like the Ultra Low y Emission Zone (ULEZ) or speeding cameras, because this is about catching y a vehicle on one of the hundreds of thousands of small roads.
But you cant y put a camera on every intersection and every road, which is why there was y so much leakage in the enforcement a problem not unique to this borough.
y First, we needed to assess the size of the problem.
So, we purchased a dataset y of trac ow from companies that capture this data from plug-in car devices.
y is data included one representative month in the year that recorded ows y of vehicles tted with Pit devices or embedded modems.
T T OMA s S Z Ull ULL MAN 250 y In that one month there were half a million trips and een million data points; y these were basically breadcrumbs.
We now knew where they started, where y they nished, what they did, and when, with timestamps.
We could then map y it to see the volume of trac ow through the dierent roads and how many y of those trips were violating the law.
y We knew exactly where people were going and how many trips originated and y ended outside and inside the borough.
e city then hired a civil engineering y trac company that installed vehicle counters for a week to recalibrate the y volumes we had gotten from our months worth of data.
en we could look y at those volumes and trac patterns to assess the opportunity.
How many y vehicles are driving only on permitted roads?
How many are deviating from y!
those routes and violating the law?
What can we capture?
en we thought y" about what the enforcement solution might look like, came up with two or y# three, and settled on one approach with two elements.
y$ e rst part was a sequencing model that looked at the sequence of passing y% cameras and all the possible combinations.
We started with a network of the y& 50 cameras our budget stretched to, then looked at placing them at major y' intersections, and what would be allowed and not allowed in the sequence of y( passing the cameras.
If you observe a vehicle passing camera A, and then the y) next time you y0 see it, its passing camera C without passing camera B, then y1 you know they violated the law because the only permitted route is to go past y2 camera B before C.
y3 We had a massive spreadsheet with all the dierent possible combinations, y4 like a correlation matrix on all the cameras and dierent rules.
en we took y5 the actual data from the trips and mapped it onto the matrix, so we could y6 see how many trips would have been picked up by dierent combinations of y7 sequencing cameras.
is enabled us to draw a detection curve.
e rst few y8 cameras you install provide really high value and, from that, we could build y9 more sensitivity into the curve.
By adding additional cameras, what incremental y@ coverage do you add against decreasing marginal returns?
en, by adding yA in the costs of the camera, ongoing maintenance, the number of tickets you yB can issue, and the expected revenue, you can calculate the breakeven point T T OMA s S Z Ull ULL MAN 251 yC and provide a recommendation on the optimal number of cameras.
at was yD phase one: detection.
Obviously, when you build something like this, youre yE going to have a number of trips that are incorrectly classied or maybe there yF was an obstruction.
e cameras arent perfect; you might miss something, or yG someone might appeal their ticket and so on.
ats one of the challenges of yH working with leaders who dont really understand what data can oer them.
yI Data science and AI are struggling with the fact that London and other cities yP can issue tickets but they need to provide clear evidence of the violation.
If yQ you get a speeding ticket, then you get a picture of your car and a timestamp yR and the speed you were going.
In our case, the evidence is the absence of you yS showing up on the camera.
So, the whole logic of evidence is completely upside yT down.
e city was scratching their heads, thinking, How are we going to yU evidence this and be compliant?
is was a nationwide problem.
yV e second part of our modeling was, if you have the correct sequence where, yW you expect to see a vehicle going between camera A and camera B, that vehicle yX may still deviate between those two cameras into a residential road.
So, our yY model assumes theres a time element to it, but how much time, and can you y` account for whether its rush hour or not?
e time element was the second ya area of enhancement.
yb e problem again with this is that the basis for detection of the violation is yc probabilistic.
Are we right, probabilistically assuming or statistically assuming yd how long it should take?
We look at the curve at this point say twelve oclock ye on Tuesday this is how much trac there is, this is the congestion, this is yf the curve so, if you yg fall outside of that normal distribution, then you know yh with a certain degree of condence youre likely to have violated the ban.
is yi provided an additional complication of how to deal with evidence thats not yp binary; its not using the evidence, its based on probabilities.
yq e work was received as a clever way of looking at it.
We could show exactly yr what detection rates are, we could build a compelling business case, and so on.
ys But the problem started with the practical side of things.
And then the main yt stakeholder we were working with, who was our biggest supporter, moved to yu a dierent role.
So, in the end, the work didnt get implemented.
T T OMA s S Z Ull ULL MAN 252 yv When I look back on it, I think the leaders didnt understand that AI and machine yw learning are based on probabilities.
Unless you were able to use something yx like camera density, to do perfect vision-based tracking, theres no certainty.
yy City ocials are a lot like the automotive industry; they are used to dealing y with engineering facts, which are measured with devices.
Its very binary, so y the way people make decisions is very black or white.
Yet, the new tools of y data science you dont need to go to machine learning and AI, just simple y statistics or econometrics are all based on probabilities.
is made the city y ocials uncomfortable.
y It also raised all sorts of questions, including legal ones, as ocials anticipated y people pushing back on tickets, saying, You have no evidence to prove this.
So, y then you y start to look at all these other operational costs, such as how do you y deal with these complaints?
It became a more complicated problem for the city.
y LISA y : What would you do dierently next time?
y TOMASZ y : We should y have had a better relationship with more senior decision- y makers so we could have discussed these issues and scenarios before building y the models, designing the solution then building it, and so on.
y We underestimated the challenge that building probabilistic models, which y have an inherent level of uncertainty, would pose.
Its almost a philosophical y approach to what you accept as fact and what you accept as evidence.
is was just one example.
We did a lot of work with London and other cities where the data science solutions we would propose had that element of probability.
LISA : Can you share an example from your time at Ford where you successfully built, scaled, and implemented an initiative?
TOMASZ : Certainly, a signicant challenge for automakers today is the transition from internal combustion engines to BEVs.
Technology in this space is moving faster than consumers understanding of what it oers, so they, and businesses, T T OMA s S Z Ull ULL MAN 253 oen struggle to grasp the implications.
Businesses, particularly those with large eets, are making large investments so, its a big decision for them.
In addition, some companies, especially delivery companies, have environmental targets and want to reduce their emissions.
We wanted to provide them with the necessary insights to make informed decisions about the pros and cons of switching.
So, we developed an online calculator tool on Ford Pro UK.
For existing customers sharing drive data with us, the tool performs real-time analytics to compare the performance and costs of internal combustion engines with BEVs.
Questions like, Is electric a suitable replacement?
, What range do you need?
, What temperature are you operating in (air conditioning puts !
pressure on energy consumption)?
, Can you charge overnight?
, and What " are the operating and maintenance costs?
ese are all answered by the tool, # tailoring the advice to each individual business.
$ You can go to the Ford Pro UK website where the rst version of that tool is % up and running.
If youre an existing eet that already drives vehicles with & connected modems and youre already sharing data with us, then you can log ' in, and the analytics engine looks at the real drive data of that eet based on ( the internal combustion engine behavior.
You can translate it to energy, and ) from that you can translate it into what it would mean for a battery alternative.
0 Its a like-for-like comparison.
What would it look like if you were to drive a 1 battery electric vehicle today?
2 e trigger to build this tool is aligned with Ford Pros strategic goals to boost 3 BEV sales in line with annual targets up to 2030.
Achieving these targets will 4 naturally cascade to other developments, like more charging stations and 5 more advanced telematic solutions to track.
In addition, there are broader 6 implications for upskilling 7 dealers to service BEVs, diversifying supply chains, 8 and more.
All of these things are built into our growth plans.
T T OMA s S Z Ull ULL MAN 254 9 LISA @ : What challenges did you face in building the tool?
A TOMASZ B : ere C were two main challenges: technical and legal.
Consent was D crucial because we could only use data from registered customers who explicitly E granted permission, which led to a lot of work on data segregation and legal F compliance because the data could only be used for this initiative.
G On the technical side, we had a trade-o between model accuracy and applicability.
H e tool is highly accurate because it takes a specic set of data on the specic I eet and does a like-for-like comparison, but its restricted to existing Ford P eet customers with relatively new vehicles that have connected modems.
It Q doesnt work for older models or non-Ford vehicles, which limits its broader R application.
So, right now this tool is good for upselling or cross-selling for S existing customers but limited beyond that.
Future phases aim to simplify this T model and make the tool more inclusive, allowing customers to ll in the details U themselves.
We can then provide some high-level benchmarking thats not as V accurate but gives a broader audience a avor of the results.
Right now, our W Ford Pro Telematics can integrate non-Ford vehicles through API integration X or with a non-OEM plug-in device.
Were considering extending this feature Y to the new tool as well, making it more brand agnostic, so we could potentially ` assess a non-Ford engine eet to provide similar recommendations.
a LISA b : How do you measure the impact of a tool like this?
c TOMASZ d : We can measure e that people who went through the process were f more likely to switch their eet to battery electric compared to those who didnt.
g We have sales teams pushing this product and making their pitches.
Weve h seen a good upli so far but its too soon aer launch to say more right now.
i LISA p : What do you wish youd known about building a tool like this?
q TOMASZ r : I wish Id s understood the depth of the knowledge gap among the t eets we target.
Because theyve never driven a battery vehicle, they oen dont u even know the right questions to ask about transitioning to battery electric T T OMA s S Z Ull ULL MAN 255 v vehicles.
While customer-centric design is essential, its not entirely eective w here because the customers themselves are unaware of their future challenges.
x We say, Go and talk to customers to understand their pain points, but in y this case, they dont know what challenges theyre going to run into.
So, Id say, Sure, involve your customers but dont expect them to give you all the answers.
Its like Steve Jobs designing the iPod even though it wasnt solving a problem, and nobody was asking for it; he knew it would be appreciated.
In the same way, people dont know what to expect from BEVs so you have to guide them innovation needs to anticipate needs.
Also, its crucial to have executive buy-in, particularly from C-level leaders who can understand both the business value and the technical aspects of data science, AI, and machine learning.
A data-savvy CFO or CMO can better articulate the tools value and benets, making it easier to secure support and resources for development.
You have much more success if you have a data-savvy CFO or CMO who can speak a language of value and benets and bottom line while understanding enough of the technology and data.
LISA : What are you most excited about with data now?
TOMASZ : Traditionally, automotive companies only thought in terms of vehicles where cars were simply viewed as a means to move from point A to B.
Now, with data, soware, and electrication, vehicles are evolving into multifunctional productivity tools serving as workplaces, entertainment centers, and more.
e emergence of AI further amplies these possibilities, revolutionizing the entire mobility and transportation landscape.
e whole area of mobility and transportation is completely changing.
How all this intersects with urban development and new technologies such as the Internet of ings, is very inspiring.
ese new players and dynamics are all enablers of an exciting new future.
e mobility ecosystem is increasingly being driven by data which is changing how we view transportation and also impacting how we live and interact, and thats super exciting to me.
T T OMA s S Z Ull ULL MAN 256 Key Takeaways Probabilistic decision-making : Invest in educating stakeholders who are accustomed to dealing with binary facts on the full scope implications of probabilistic decision-making in AI.
Run scenarios of potential outcomes to demonstrate how a model might impact decision-making.
Anticipate potential legal and operational challenges that probabilistic models can introduce, and plan mitigation strategies beforehand.
Future-proof executive support : Build a broad executive understanding of the nancial impact and proposed AI solutions to gain buy-in.
Recognize that the development and implementation of AI solutions oen require time and investment.
Secure this wide support to mitigate the disruption risk of key stakeholders moving to dierent roles.
Data consent and legal compliance : Understand the industrys specic regulatory and enforcement challenges.
Secure explicit consent from customers to use their data for a specic initiative.
Ensure strict segregation from other datasets and that it is only used for the specied initiative.
: Consider the trade-o between model accuracy and applicability.
While a model might be highly accurate for a specic set of data, it may not have a broader application.
257 25 O O z K K rakowski at Deepdub E eres this huge push for self-identity its like everyone F wants things tailor-made for their own culture, preferences, G and personal identity.
is isnt just about movies or TV H shows; its everywhere.
And, when you project this trend I into the future, its clear that making localization easy and P accessible is going to be a game-changer.
LinkedIn: ozkrakowski S O O Z K K RAKOW s S KI 258 T Oz Krakowski U has a solid educational background in electrical engineering V and holds a Masters in Business Administration (MBA) from the SMU Cox W School of Business in Dallas.
With 16 years of experience in the US working X with international clients including Texas Instruments, he seamlessly combines Y a unique blend of business acumen with technical knowledge.
` Ozs entrepreneurial brothers founded Deepdub in 2019 in Israel.
Oz joined a this venture which aims to transcend language barriers and cultural gaps in b audiovisual content.
Integrating AI, deep learning algorithms, and automated c workows, Deepdub meets the burgeoning demand for localization in the media d industry by making content universally accessible and culturally resonant.
e LISA f : How did you and your brothers decide to focus on the media industry?
g OZ h : e advent of i digital streaming services and the eects of the COVID-19 p pandemic revealed a signicant need for accessible localization, which Deepdub q aimed to ll.
We oer both a managed service and a SaaS platform, catering r to a range of customers from B2B to enterprise clients.
s e whole issue of localization is much more complex when you look beyond t entertainment.
Remember when everyone used to talk about the world being u a global village?
e idea was that were all connected and can hop across the v globe in a heartbeat.
But nowadays, theres this huge push for self-identity its w like everyone wants things tailor-made for their own culture, preferences, and x personal identity.
is isnt just about movies or TV shows; its everywhere.
And, y when you project this trend into the future, its clear that making localization easy and accessible is going to be a game-changer.
Why shouldnt people in Southeast Asia, for example, enjoy content in their own language?
e only reason they havent until now, is because its been too pricey or just unavailable.
eres been no proper setup for it, so theyve had to make do with subtitles.
But, for example, when literacy rates are low, subtitles arent going to cut it.
O O Z K K RAKOW s S KI 259 So, what were looking at is dubbing stepping into the spotlight.
Its going to become way more prevalent.
Sure, entertainment is a great way to test out the concept and get the ball rolling, but the potential market for localized content is massive beyond that.
ink about it: theres a whole world of audiovisual material out there, and people are more than ready to consume it in their own language when its available.
ats the future I see, and its a pretty exciting one.
LISA : Can you explain how Deepdub provides solutions for entertainment that might otherwise not get translated or dubbed (localized, as you term it)?
OZ : Many of our clients wouldnt localize their content if not for our technology, for various reasons.
Even those who do localize at scale oen come to us to expand their current services.
We can pretty much open a new territory because our technology dramatically lowers the barrier to entry compared to traditional localization processes, making content that wouldnt be economically viable to localize otherwise feasible.
Its simple economics; if you lower the cost of investment, the greater the chances that youre going to see the return on it.
And the idea for us is not only that were making it more economically feasible, but were also dramatically reducing the turnaround time, which means you can start monetizing it faster.
So, instead of being two years in the future, its going to be three months.
Heres a good example: we worked on a Danish show called Follow the Money a mix of Danish and Arabic, which, by the way, adds a whole new layer of complexity when youre tackling localization because its not just about the language, its also about the cultural nuances, right?
e show had three seasons, each with 10 episodes, and each episode runs for, Id say, about 57 to 58 minutes, which totals over 1,700 minutes of content to dub.
Traditionally, dubbing a single season of 10 episodes could take 8 to 14 weeks, which includes everything from the moment you get the materials until you hand over the nal product to the client.
And it is a convoluted process with many additional steps setting up, casting, project management way beyond just producing the dubbed content.
O O Z K K RAKOW s S KI 260 !
But in our dubbing service, we processed all 30 episodes in just 8 weeks; thats " a 60% time saving and cost saving of at least 30%.
Its a huge deal, especially # when you consider that some of the big studios would typically shell out up $ to 50% more for traditional dubbing services.
% And were not just talking dubbing here.
We deliver the full package, from & end to end; no need for extra investments for those additional, oen pricey, ' side products.
From the materials ( we receive to the nished, localized product, ) we handle it all.
So, not only do we save time and money, but we also simplify 0 everything by delivering a ready-to-go, localized show.
1 LISA 2 : Can you talk us through the technology stack behind your solution?
3 OZ 4 : Weve developed 5 two main business units: our subscription-based service and 6 the managed services, which are like two sides of the same coin, technologically 7 speaking.
Our subscription-based service oers end-to-end localization at scale 8 on a single platform.
e subscribed users drive the work, and the platform 9 enables them to control every step of the localization process while they can @ determine how much or how little they wish to intervene in the automated A processes.
Our proprietary technology is the rst of its kind with emotion- B based text-to-speech (eTTS) and speech-to-speech capabilities enabling the C user to have control over the outcome.
D Figure 25.
1 Deepdub.
ai Localization Workflows E O O Z K K RAKOW s S KI 261 F For our managed services, Deepdub aims to bridge the language barrier and G cultural gap of entertainment experiences for international audiences.
We H provide high-quality seamless localization of entertainment content using I deep learning and AI algorithms.
is service plugs into the post-production P process of content owners and takes complete ownership of all their localization Q needs.
It uses a combination of our unique proprietary technology, an in-house R expert production team, and the relevant certications.
S e managed service is super versatile, letting us handle a wide variety of content T and nail down a high-quality nish.
On the other hand, the SaaS platform is U more specialized, dialed V into particular types of content and workows.
Its W perfect for when you need good-enough quality without all the bells and whistles.
X We employ in-house-developed generative AI models for the entire localization Y workow, which is broken down into transcription, translation, adaptation, ` voice generation, and mixing.
e dubbing process starts with ingesting the a video content.
If we dont have a script, we transcribe the audio rst, turning b speech into text.
Once weve got the transcript, we move on to translation, which c is this neat dance between AI and human smarts.
e exact mix depends on d what were working on and what result we hope to achieve.
e Aer translation, theres adaptation.
ats where the human touch really f shines.
Dierent content needs dierent tweaks, right?
Like a joke in Danish g has got to land just as well in English.
en comes voice generation.
Instead h of booking studio time and having voice actors do their thing, were creating i voices with computers.
Its pretty wild.
We can start from plain text or even p morph existing speech into a new language.
q e last piece of the puzzle is the mix.
ats where we blend the new dialogue r with all the original background tunes and sound eects.
Its like recreating s the original vibe of the show or movie.
If were working on something simpler, t like a training video, we can skip the fancy mixing.
But for entertainment?
Its u got to be spot-on, or else itll just feel o.
O O Z K K RAKOW s S KI 262 v Whats really slick about our platform is how weve streamlined the process.
w Imagine one person handling transcription, translation, and even voice generation x all in one go.
And the mixing?
Its automated.
So, you press a button and y bam, youve got a fully dubbed video ready for YouTube or whatever.
For more intricate stu like Follow the Money , we go all in, ne-tuning every detail.
e AI might be smart, but its not cracking jokes yet, you know?
ats why we still loop in native speakers to make sure everythings on point.
One of the big perks of our platform is how we let humans step in at any stage to make sure the tech output hits the mark.
Because lets face it, when youre sinking into your seat at the cinema, youre not going to settle for less than perfect.
And we wouldnt want to be the ones getting roasted on Twitter aer the premiere, right?
LISA : How do you see customer processes changing with the introduction of your technology?
OZ : e integration of our technology is really simplifying customer operations, especially where traditional localization has needed a lot of eort and coordination with external parties.
Localization has been slow to evolve due to a lack of technological advancements but were starting to see a shi.
As our AI becomes more accurate and requires less human curation, we anticipate a future where live dubbing and seamless localization are commonplace.
As the need for extensive human intervention diminishes, I foresee large operational teams will shrink but this doesnt mean job losses; rather, its a transition.
e workforce will migrate toward dierent, and oen new, roles that are emerging alongside AI developments.
e eort required for tasks such as localizing a TV show will decrease dramatically.
O O Z K K RAKOW s S KI 263 LISA : What changes do you foresee in studios production processes and the future applications for your technology?
OZ : Looking to the future, I think the key term is better.
By that, I mean more accurate and requiring less curation.
Curation wont disappear; itll always be necessary, particularly in entertainment, to meet audience expectations.
However, as our technology evolves, becoming more accurate and capable of handling a wider range of idioms, the necessity for intensive curation to achieve quality output will decrease.
At the moment, the speed of content processing is limited by the need for curation at multiple stages, including translation and voice generation.
Although the quality of our output is already impressive, there are occasional glitches !
that we are aiming to eliminate.
is isnt a distant dream; its a reality thats " almost at our ngertips.
# Were on the verge of being able to oer glitch-free voice generation.
Coupled $ with signicant improvements in translation, were moving toward live dubbing % capabilities.
Some startups are already experimenting with this, albeit with & poor quality.
But were focusing on quality.
Imagine live events broadcast in ' multiple languages simultaneously thats where were headed.
( e trajectory of our technology will allow for live dubbing in original voices ) across multiple languages.
Video lip-synch will eventually enable actors to 0 perform in one language with their lips moving accurately in another.
As this 1 technology is integrated into workows, it will be possible for me to speak to you 2 in Hebrew and you hear me in English, seamlessly.
is is the transformative 3 potential of our technology, and its an exciting prospect.
4 LISA 5 : Can you tell us more about your use of AI in the post-production 6 services you oer studios?
7 OZ 8 : One of the most 9 innovative features were developing with studios is voice @ cloning, which is particularly useful during the ADR (Automated Dialogue A Replacement) process for lm and TV production.
For example, aer shooting O O Z K K RAKOW s S KI 264 B an entire TV series in one month, it might go live two years later, during which C time it undergoes multiple production processes, including additional viewings D and testing, which oen require dialogue changes.
E Traditionally, this means calling back actors to re-record their lines, which F is expensive and logistically dicult, especially if theyre involved in other G productions.
Voice cloning allows us to make necessary dialogue changes H without physically bringing the actor back into the studio.
is can be a cost- I eective solution, reducing both operational burdens and expenses for studios.
P Moreover, consider a situation where the actor was a child during the original Q lming and their voice has changed by the time pickups (additional lming) R are needed.
Voice cloning can replicate the original voice exactly as it was, S which is invaluable.
T Although its a niche market since it mainly serves high-end lm and TV shows, U of which there are a limited number produced each year this technology is V incredibly valuable.
Its not just about the 500 or so lms produced by big studios W annually; its also about X the thousands of hours of content that need localization.
Y LISA ` : Are there any key messages youd like to share that could benet CEOs a and board members?
b OZ c : I think its crucial d to recognize that the landscape of AI is shiing rapidly, and e inaction is not a safe strategy.
e reluctance to embrace AI due to uncertainty f can be detrimental.
From my conversations over the past six months, a common g theme is the hesitancy to adopt AI, oen stemming from a wait-and-see attitude.
h However, in our fast-evolving world, waiting even a few years to see where AI i is heading is excessively risky.
p C-suite executives and inuential leaders begin to see the value of AI once q they engage with it, particularly when the conversation turns to the nancial r implications.
e potential impact on the bottom line is signicant, and s understanding this is critical for senior executives whose primary concern is t economic outcomes.
O O Z K K RAKOW s S KI 265 u Unlike previous technological revolutions that spanned years, the pace of AI v development is happening quarterly.
For example, recent advancements allow w AI to analyze images, and were making leaps every quarter.
If youre not on x board, youre not just two years behind youre in technology dog years, where y every quarter equates to several years of progress.
8 Key Takeaways 8 8 8 Simplify customer operations with AI 8 : Consolidate repetitive tasks within 8 high-value processes and leverage AI tools to automate tasks, handle inquiries 8 eciently, and ultimately enhance customer experiences.
8 8 8 Human-in-the-loop (HITL) approach 9 : Use AI for repetitive analytical tasks but 9 maintain a human-AI collaboration for complex tasks and decision-making.
9 is fusion approach yields the greatest high-quality outputs.
9 9 9 Explore subscription models for easier AI adoption 9 : Consider subscription- 9 based and managed services models for a lower-risk entry point to explore AI.
9 Experiment with dierent solutions without a signicant upfront investment, 9 and benet from expert support from the service provider.
@ @ @ Transform customer connections @ : Personalize customer experiences with @ AI.
Incorporating AI into customer operations isnt just about eciency its @ a fundamental shi that aligns with our evolving understanding of identity @ and culture.
@ @ @ Key messages for CEOs and board members A : Recognize that the landscape A of AI is shiing rapidly and inaction is not a safe strategy.
Overcome the A common hesitancy to adopt AI, whether due to a wait-and-see attitude or A uncertainty.
Understand the transformative potential of AI and proactively A integrate it into organization strategies.
267 A 26 A CASE STUDY A LL M M s and RAG RAG E E nable A H H yper-Personalized B E E ducation for H H ealthcare B T T echnicians " IN CONVERSATION WITH AMR AWADALLAH # : Founder $ and CEO of Vectara, a generative AI % soware company with a & mission to help enterprise customers nd and leverage insights ' more eectively from their unstructured data assets.
B LinkedIn: B awadallah 268 C Case Study in Summary C C C C Segment: B2B C C C Industry: Technology, medical C services C D D Geography: North America D D D Value creation levers: Product knowledge, training D D D Time to impact: Less than 1 month D D E Regulatory considerations: High E The Business Challenge R Vectaras customer, SonoSim, an ultrasound training and education platform, S needed a scalable T mechanism for end users (ultrasound technicians) to increase the U speed at which they could be educated about how to use, calibrate, and optimize V ultrasound machines and deploy advanced methods of detection and prevention.
W Legacy solutions relied on a traditional search query model that yielded a long X list of results, requiring technicians to si through large amounts of content to Y identify the most suitable response.
e challenges were: F F F Developing a method to navigate large volumes of technician-specic materials F more intuitively and quickly, to get insightful, relevant answers.
F F F e ability to quickly draw inferences between highly technical terminology F and serve grounded responses based on the training data.
F F G Ensuring a high degree of precision in answers while safeguarding proprietary G content from being shared outside the company.
269 G The Response s Amr and his team at Vectara have developed an end-to-end approach to help t companies u like SonoSim leverage powerful generative AI technologies using their v own data.
eir soware solution helped SonoSim implement a more intuitive, w natural-language-based capability enabling ultrasound professionals to rapidly x query extensive materials to get specic answers to a variety of questions.
y e work was done in two phases: Phase 1 : .
SonoSims extensive content repository spanned 9000+ pages of text (equivalent to 300+ textbooks), 5000 images, and 4000 video clips with continued rapid growth.
ey needed a mechanism to query this database on mobile devices and deliver precise teaching content tailored to each users needs.
Phase 2 : Implementing Vectaras platform and calibrating it to SonoSims environment .
Vectaras Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG)-based generative AI cloud-based platform delivered a natural language search capability.
RAG improves the accuracy of generative AI models by fetching facts from, and grounding the model on external knowledge sources.
e conversational interface enabled interaction with real patient cases, delivering a hyper-personalized learning experience, custom course creation with continuous assessments, skill development, and mastery for medical professionals that overcame the previous nancial, linguistic, and logistical barriers.
e solution had a signicant impact, streamlining access to information while enhancing user engagement and satisfaction.
Generative AI also harnessed previously underutilized data to improve the models and performance, while positioning SonoSim as a pioneer in state-of-the-art services to users in healthcare education.
270 P Case Study in Detail P As an innovator in the tech industry, Amr Awadallh has signicantly inuenced big data and AI in a career spanning over 25 years.
As the CEO and co-founder of Vectara, he is at the forefront of transforming generative AI and conversational search using state-of-the-art technologies like deep neural networks, large language models, and natural language processing.
His extensive background includes serving as the Vice President of Developer Relations for Google Cloud and eight years as VP of Product Intelligence Engineering at Yahoo.
Aer this, he co-founded Cloudera in 2008, where he was the Global CTO.
Cloudera went public in 2017 at a valuation of over $5 billion.
Amr, a respected gure in the global tech community, holds a PhD in electrical engineering from Stanford University.
His deep technical expertise, combined !
with a strategic business perspective, is a result of his tenure as VP of Product " Intelligence.
His desire to share insights further enhances his reputation and # inuence in the eld.
R The Business Challenge % AMR & : SonoSim specializes ' in training technicians to expertly utilize, calibrate, ( and optimize ultrasound machines.
As a life-saving technology, ultrasound ) imagings eectiveness hinges on skilled detection and identication.
Mastering this 0 technology is complex, oen requiring technicians and radiologists to seek frequent 1 guidance.
Inadequate expertise can compromise the critical use of ultrasound, as 2 exemplied by procedures like guided internal jugular vein cannulation, where 3 a mere 3mm distinction in imaging can be the dierence between saving a life 4 and causing a stroke.
Such real-world applications underscore the importance 5 of prociency in various ultrasound modalities, including sonographic anatomy 6 and hand-eye coordination to navigate a probe in 3D space.
271 7 SonoSims mission is to enhance medical professionals ultrasound prociency 8 across various scenarios, oering a rich array of educational tools, resources, and 9 services.
e challenge lies in managing the vast, ever-growing content library to @ allow users both practitioners and educators to swily nd specic information.
T e value of bedside ultrasound is highly dependent upon the T skills of the medical practitioner performing the ultrasound exam.
T Eric Savitsky, Founder and CEO of SonoSim D e company aims to streamline the education pathway, for more ecient E machine usage and immediate problem-solving during procedures.
However, the F traditional search for information is time-consuming and cumbersome.
Content G generated by technicians, including manuals and FAQs, exacerbates this issue H by increasing the bulk of material to navigate.
I SonoSim, therefore wanted to implement a solution that accelerates the search for P and retrieval of information, simplies content creation, and promotes consistent Q practice for mastery.
is eort is vital for integrating ultrasound into broader R clinical assessments, which requires coordination with other busy healthcare S professionals.
e T primary goal is to deliver eective teaching within resource, U time, and budget constraints, fostering repeated learning opportunities to integrate V ultrasounds role in clinical decision-making at a deeper level.
U Context-dependent issues X Implementing generative AI technology in the medical space brings specic Y technical challenges ` that must be navigated with precision: V V V Reliability: Above all, the AIs output must be dependable.
e everyday reality V of hallucinations or misleading AI-generated data, if unchecked, could be V detrimental to clinical outcomes.
272 V V V Patient privacy: Safeguarding sensitive health information is non-negotiable.
V Any AI system must uphold stringent patient privacy standards to maintain W trust and compliance with regulations.
W W W Explainability: e AIs decision-making process must be transparent, W allowing healthcare professionals to understand and trust the logic behind W AI-generated recommendations or analyses.
W W W Bias mitigation: AI systems must be designed to minimize inherent biases W and ensure the integrity of the medical insights.
Optimizing reliability is the cornerstone for addressing the subsequent challenges in maintaining privacy, clarity, and fairness.
Without ensuring that the AIs outputs are accurate and trustworthy, other goals remain unachievable.
erefore, reliability is not just a preliminary step but a continuous requirement that underpins the integrity and utility of generative AI in healthcare.
X Approach X AMR : e main friction for a business leader is confusion about generative AI applications.
ey say, We know we need to use generative AI, but were not sure what to use it for.
Usually, the discussion happens very quickly with them.
We start by asking, What are some of the problems you have in your company?
en we demonstrate how Vectaras solutions can help.
Some of them are clear, such as with SonoSims need for information retrieval.
It was very clear that the product could deliver answers deeply aligned with the users search intent, far surpassing keyword-based solutions.
SonoSims process involves scanning real patient ultrasound scans and aggregating the data (volumetric, 3D and 4D, motion sensing, and so on) into a centralized cloud platform to create a vast library of training content accessible via mobile devices.
is cloud-based platform oers multiple modalities, assessments, and skill tracking for practitioners.
e ever-growing repository is extensive, with 273 over 9,000 pages of text (equivalent to over 300 textbooks) more than 5,000 images, and upward of 4000 video clips.
SonoSims use case was to implement the most ecient method for practitioners and educators to pinpoint the precise content they need, such as, Im looking to scan a large pericardial eusion, to deliver extremely precise, hyper-personalized teaching, tailored to the users immediate needs.
To demonstrate the scale, context, and urgency of this challenge, todays medical knowledge is expanding at such a rapid rate that it doubles approximately every 70 days, compared to once every 50 years in 1950.
So, SonoSim sought a solution that could deliver the correct educational content swily in this ever-expanding landscape of information.
When SonoSim initially came to us, they signed up to our self-boarding option.
Once they tried this out, they saw many of the key features they needed were on the next tier of service and this was important to them, especially because in the health space, they need certain security and compliance requirements.
Our team engaged with them from there and the whole process took about three weeks.
It was very, very smooth because they had already tried out the platform !
and built a prototype " with it.
Our # engagement deepened as we provided tailored $ advice to ensure the integration could scale eectively with their business needs.
b Phase 2: Implementing Vectaras Platform and Calibrating to b SonoSims Environment ' The Vectara platform and process ( AMR ) : Vectaras platform 0 is at the forefront 1 of generative AI and neural 2 network 3 4 advancements, providing exceptional search accuracy through semantic 5 understanding.
Our system excels in deciphering user queries, regardless of 6 phrasing, ensuring the delivery of highly pertinent results.
7 For comparison, OpenAI and other models facilitate the ne-tuning of large 8 language models.
is process involves uploading proprietary data to iteratively 274 9 train a model, thus customizing its responses.
Although user-friendly and @ ecacious, this approach is not without its challenges.
A Fine-tuning begins with a base model, such as GPT-3 or GPT-4, already trained B on publicly available datasets and various corporate contributions.
e objective C for businesses is to embed their unique dataset into the model.
By doing so, the D model evolves, integrating the new data to form a derivative, ne-tuned version, E now enriched with both public and proprietary knowledge.
F In this process, companies strive to exclude unwanted data through a technique G called negative training.
is involves instructing the LLM to disregard certain H information.
However, completely eliminating unwanted data is dicult.
I ere might always be some residual data le behind, especially if there isnt a P perfect understanding of what to exclude.
To address this challenge, the new, Q customer-specic data is incorporated, not in its original form but as condensed, R meaningful interpretations learned by the model.
is way, the LLM leverages S valuable insights while minimizing the inuence of unwanted elements.
T Fine-tunings main drawbacks are its cost and computational demands.
Its an U intensive process that requires powerful hardware, like the NVIDIA A100 Tensor V Core GPU, designed to provide acceleration for AI and analytics.
It can take W extensive time for the data to be assimilated, making it impractical for rapidly X changing datasets.
Y Another concern is the potential for hallucinations.
Even when ne-tuned, ` these language models lack strict mechanisms to prevent such errors, leading a to occasional unreliable responses.
In sectors where accuracy is critical, such as b healthcare or nance, the inability to trace the models reasoning process or cite c data sources is a signicant drawback.
d Furthermore, even with careful training, bias and the inadvertent inclusion of e copyrighted material remain risks, opening the door to, for example, a copyright f owner coming aer me instead of going aer OpenAI, because Im in a well-known g brand using it.
Intellectual property violations are a big concern for companies h leveraging these models.
275 i In contrast, Vectara uses Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) to mitigate p these issues.
is method reduces costs, enhances security, lowers the risk of q hallucinations, and allows for the provision of citations.
It eciently extracts, r encodes, and s indexes content t from diverse formats (including PDFs, PowerPoint, u images, video, and audio sources), aligning search results closely with user inquiries.
v It also enables the generation of contextually relevant and precise content.
w Figure 26.
1 Flow diagram demonstrating how grounded generation works x Our neural search technology, integrating hybrid search (keyword and LLM), y signicantly outperforms traditional keyword-based searches in delivering relevant results.
is is because the engine operates not just on the recognition of keywords, but also on the comprehension of the meaning behind the words.
e integration of hybrid search enhances the precision and context-awareness of the results.
is multilingual capability also means it has a broad geographical reach.
RAG is an approach that leverages the power of LLMs to generate responses.
e key aspect of this approach is that it retrieves relevant information from external data sources in addition to the users data.
is combined knowledge base allows RAG to tailor responses that are essentially a reection of the users 276 unique knowledge base, making the interaction more relevant.
ats really the secret sauce here.
is is all made possible by advanced information retrieval systems and machine learning models that prioritize semantic correlation over keyword matching.
is semantic approach mirrors the cognitive processing of LLMs, utilizing vector embeddings to represent meaning.
Figure 26.
2 Vectaras end-to-end platform for retrieval, reranking, encoding, and generation is novel technique is grounded in research, including papers authored by my co-founder, Amin Ahmad, which describe the development of neural networks that transition from linguistic to semantic comprehension.
Despite currently utilizing GPT models as a foundation, we anticipate transitioning to Meta AIs LLaMA, a new suite of LLMs unveiled in 2023.
277 Translating language into meaning Vectaras platform revolutionizes data processing by translating it into a vector database, essentially a meaning database.
is preserves the high-delity content, converting it into vectors that encapsulate the essence behind words, in whatever language you use.
ey are stored in their original content not compressed or ne-tuned.
So, when a query comes in, the engine matches the querys semantic intent with its knowledge base, ensuring only relevant, high- quality facts are used to construct responses.
Eliminating bias and enhancing accuracy Our RAG approach prevents biases and copyright infringements by strictly using veried facts.
It eliminates hallucinations, as responses are based on concrete !
data, not conjecture.
is method is supported by advanced meaning engines, " crucial for accurate information retrieval and ranking, thus empowering the # LLM to generate precise, accurate, and $ reliable % answers.
& Responsiveness, balance, and copyright adherence ' e process starts ( when a ) query is input into our 0 search box.
e system then 1 collates results and synthesizes them into a coherent response.
Crucially, the LLM 2 is restricted to using only the provided facts, which are pre-validated and scored, 3 based on whether the meaning matches that of the prompts, with 100% indicating 4 a perfect match and 0% indicating no relevance.
e model is instructed to cite 5 these facts, employing a citation notation that reects their relevance score.
If none 6 of the facts are pertinent, the model is programmed to refrain from fabricating 7 information and instead admit to the lack of relevant data.
8 is method ensures a multi-perspective approach to information processing.
9 When dealing with queries that inherently contain multiple viewpoints or possible @ answers, the system is designed to present a balanced view, incorporating all A relevant perspectives rather than favoring any single one.
278 B In addition, the model is constrained to only reproduce facts, which means it C will not inadvertently disclose any copyrighted material unless it forms part of D the facts it has been supplied.
While the model may learn and replicate certain E writing styles, it is our responsibility to ensure that these do not infringe on F copyright laws.
G Citations for transparency H Last but not least, citations I play a critical role in the transparency of our process.
P Citations linked to the facts ensure explainability, allowing users to trace the Q origin of the information provided by the LLM.
is signicantly reduces R hallucinations as the model consistently grounds its responses in factual data.
S Google and Microso also have ground generation.
T The meaning engine U e key component V to RAGs eectiveness is the capability of the meaning engine.
W If you dont nd the right facts, the model collapses.
Its wholly dependent on the X facts being correctly ordered, based on their meaning and being scored correctly.
Y is precision enables the LLM to perform adeptly even when presented with ` data it has not been previously trained on because of the strength of our zero-shot a model learning capacity.
Because it indexes new information, discerning the best b meanings and making informed associations, it can deal with data categories or c classes its never encountered d before.
is advanced capability is foundational e to our LLMs ability.
f Specialization through verticalization g As we broaden h our LLMs verticalization, we tailor them to sectors like legal, i medical, and accounting, while maintaining a general model for wider topics.
p Real-time prompt analysis helps us understand the customers intent and guide q queries to the most suitable specialized model.
is focused strategy guarantees r not only accurate but also contextually relevant responses, leveraging the specic s knowledge of the selected vertical.
279 t Simplifying integration u If you were building v this yourself, you would have to worry about all of these steps.
w Building such a system from scratch involves numerous complex steps that can x be daunting for the average engineer, let alone smaller rms without extensive y tech resources.
Vectara streamlines this with a simple API for data ingestion and interaction.
We aim to reduce the heavy liing, allowing users to easily upload their data and obtain responsive outputs without worrying about the back-end complexities.
While we envision a vast connection framework, our immediate solution is a straightforward API that customers can use independently.
However, even if our API is very straightforward to get up and running with, there are still hoops to jump through, so that does add some friction.
Comparable solutions are available from major cloud providers, such as Azure Semantic Search and Google Clouds Vertex AI Conversation, while Amazon is expected to introduce a similar service, but we prioritized making our systems plug-and- play, requiring little to no conguration from users to achieve the best results.
Our focus on features such as security compliance, extensibility of answers and mitigation of hallucinations, bias, and copyright infringements, sets us apart in the marketplace.
The SonoSim Implementation AMR : is was driven by the product team, with a relatively small engineering team.
A customer support engineer was tasked to implement our technology into SonoSims enterprise technology stack.
is engineer, who oversaw the content management system across Sonosims product line, was well-placed to support the implementation.
Deep machine learning expertise was not a necessity; rather, the role required a developer who was conversant with SonoSims systems.
We implemented our Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) based generative AI solution on their vast content repository of A-grade, optimally authored and trusted content.
e solution allowed SonoSims users to access content via a conversational interface.
Instead of delivering a long list of results like a legacy search solution, a simple search began to yield highly relevant material instantly.
280 Users could then eortlessly generate summaries, which, in turn, can be leveraged to create customized courses on the y.
So, SonoSim could use our system for two things: the rst, for search and information retrieval and, the second, for creating more helpful content for the technicians, which delivered a number of additional benets, including: Custom course generation: Practitioners were able to generate ve-minute courses with 600 words with almost no eort but a prompt.
All information was drawn from our data and training repository, bypassing the need for any soware development or course creation materials.
Educator-facing features: ese were also a signicant part of the solution, as educators could design and roll out mastery tests to identify topics that practitioners found challenging or required further development.
ey could dynamically create training content to help individuals bridge their gaps and pass requisite skill and comprehension assessments.
And administrators could track and monitor a users progress over time.
Tailored education: SonoSim has been able to hyper-personalize the entire learning experience for their users, something that was previously nancially and logistically unfeasible.
Generative AI and RAG played critical roles in helping break down those educational barriers.
Results and Impact 3 AMR 4 : SonoSims success 5 hinged on a deep understanding of their user base 6 technicians who need real-time answers while operating ultrasound machines.
7 eir whole business is about, How do technicians nd the right answers for 8 what theyre trying to do live?
So that was a no-brainer.
is is the revenue.
9 is user focus translates directly into their business model.
ey dont just sell @ machines; they oer a solution for in-the-moment education.
ey will tell you A whats key isnt just the technology, but the extensive data library SonoSim has B built.
is library includes manuals, expert advice on machine optimization, C and other crucial documentation.
As they say, e heart is the data, data that D we have, which is all the manuals, all of the advice from experts on how to tune 281 E the machines, all of that kind of stu they have in the documentation.
ats F the power.
And thats true; getting these datasets can be very, very dicult.
G Impacts included: Eciency: e natural-language-based capability allows technicians to quickly nd specic answers to their questions, reducing time spent searching through manuals and guides.
Learning and training: e ability to query documents in a natural language format enhances technicians learning process.
Its a more interactive and engaging way to understand and learn how to use and calibrate various ultrasound machines.
Customer satisfaction: Faster, smoother, and more accurate responses to queries mean improved user satisfaction.
Data utilization: By leveraging generative AI technologies using their own data, SonoSim can make better use of their existing assets.
e data that was previously underutilized can now be eectively used to train RAG implementation, leading to improved performance.
Innovation: Implementing such advanced AI technologies positions SonoSim as an innovator in the eld.
It shows their commitment to leveraging the latest technologies to provide the best possible service to their users.
Key Learnings Evolution of interfaces : e evolution of soware has gone through several phases, transitioning from command-line interfaces to graphical user interfaces, such as Windows 95, and subsequently to touch interfaces like those on the iPhone.
Each phase brought soware to a broader audience but necessitated the rewriting of applications to suit new modalities.
Generative AI has now enabled AI systems to comprehend human language, marking a pivotal advancement in the interface between humans and soware.
282 Data compression : Similar to how the human brain compresses information, LLMs are trained on vast datasets while requiring only a fraction of the original data for storage.
is data compression is valuable, but for company-specic data, referencing the original source is crucial.
e model (X) processes the information, while another entity (Y) holds the actual facts.
Hallucinations : AI hallucinations refer to inaccurate or misleading results generated by AI models.
Fine-tuning : e current LLMs available on the market, like GPT, are pre- trained on a diverse range of internet text and can be used by many users at the same time.
is means that, while they can generate creative text based on the input provided, they cant be ne-tuned on a specic task without going through a re-training process.
Fine-tuning builds on pre-trained LLMs by incorporating a companys unique data.
is creates a customized model enriched with both public and proprietary knowledge.
Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) : RAG is a secure, cost-eective alternative to ne-tuning in LLMs.
Its adept at extracting, encoding, and indexing intelligence from various sources, which is then retrieved and ranked per user queries.
e choice between RAG and ne-tuning depends on the task requirements.
Knowledge retrieval : LLMs signicantly improve the eciency and accuracy of knowledge retrieval within organizations, enabling swi and precise querying of proprietary information.
LLMs can help bridge gaps in specialist education, especially where there are various learning modalities, high competency thresholds, limited time and resources, as well as teaching opportunities.
283 Trustworthy AI : Trustworthy AI is a rapidly evolving eld focused on developing reliable, transparent, and privacy-respecting AI systems.
In healthcare specically, trustworthy AI is crucial for maintaining the integrity of medical education and practice.
It addresses ethical concerns like patient privacy, the explainability of AI decisions, and minimizing bias.
Future-proof education : As medical knowledge continues to rapidly expand, integrating AI ensures that educational content remains current and relevant.
e ability to update and disseminate new ndings quickly is key to future- proong the education of medical professionals.
285 P 27 CASE STUDY AI AI Personalization I I ncreases E E ngagement in N N ascent T T ech Communities V IN CONVERSATION WITH HARSH SINGHAL: W Data X scientist and current head of AI and machine learning Y at ` Koo, a microblogging social media platform targeting non- a English-speaking audiences with English-to-regional-language b keyboards, local language newsfeeds, and hyper-local hashtags.
c Koos AI-based Topics feature on the site allows users to d select their areas of interest, enhancing content relevance, user e engagement, and positive feedback.
LinkedIn: harshsinghal 286 Case Study in Summary Segment: B2C Industry: Consumer social media Geography: India, LATAM, Europe Value creation levers: Product, personalization Time to impact: 5 days-6 weeks Regulatory considerations: Medium The Business Challenge e social media landscape is dominated by a few global players, oen leaving non-English-speaking communities underserved.
Koo, a platform similar to Twitter, has a mission to cater to the 75% of the worlds population who do not speak English by allowing them to share content in a variety of languages.
With support for 20 languages, Koo focuses on enhancing user engagement through features like Topics, which is the subject of this case study, and personalized content based on user interests.
Koo boasts a diverse user base that extends beyond India to countries such as Brazil, Portugal, and Nigeria, reecting its ambition to serve a global audience.
e platform might be the rst interaction these audiences have with social media, so Koo needs to meet them where they are in terms of tech literacy with a exible approach.
Headquartered in India, Koo has expanded from its initial focus, supporting 10 Indian languages, to add an additional 10 international languages.
Growth since its inception has seen over 60 million downloads across more than 100 countries.
287 AIs inherent democratization of technology tools has enabled this Indian startup to take on Twitter in a cost-ecient way.
To drive engagement, Koo needed a scalable mechanism to personalize content to its multilingual users, addressing the existing bias toward English-speaking digital natives on global platforms.
e challenge included: Develop and launch a feature to encourage users in predominately nascent digital populations to become regular users on a social media platform and choose topics of interest to drive higher engagement metrics.
Leverage AI to categorize multi-language content into relevant topics at scale.
The Response " Harsh built and # launched Topics, an AI-based feature on the platform to enable $ users to choose their topic areas.
is made the platforms content more relevant, % improving engagement and favorable customer feedback for the brand.
& e work was ' done in three phases: ( Phase 1: Determining prioritization and design ) .
is phase prioritized the 0 development of a new feature called Topics, to help users nd content specic 1 to their interest areas.
To maximize eciency, it was decided to initially launch 2 in Hindi and English, the languages with the highest volume of users.
To ensure 3 quality, the team trained LLMs on human-labeled data, enabling the categorization 4 of content into various Topics in other languages by leveraging research of the 5 Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Madras.
6 Phase 2: Building proof of concept 7 .
is involved rapid testing and iteration.
A 8 prototype was developed and tested among 40 internal users.
Once the feature 9 worked 80% of the time, it was taken to market with a rapid testing and iteration @ process.
Community leaders and engagement teams conducted multilingual A testing of the Topics feature.
Human observation played an important role, 288 B with the output of any model or algorithm being reviewed before being taken to C production, in addition to standard model evaluation metrics.
Post-launch, user D feedback was actively sourced, providing valuable insights for further iterations.
E Automated testing tools were used to increase eciency and accuracy in the F testing process.
G Phase 3: Deploying models and safeguards H .
is phase used open source I soware from Uber called Ludwig for rapid model training.
BentoML was used P for MLOps and model deployments.
To ensure cost-eectiveness, there was tight Q coordination with the DevOps and back-end teams, with mindful usage of GPUs R and CPUs, as well as use of real-time comparison and batch processing.
e S Topics feature was initially launched in English and Hindi, then expanded to T other Indian languages.
Safeguards were put in place to ensure content security U and moderation through legal V compliance, protection of personal data, robust W content moderation measures, and anti-toxicity models to remove hate speech.
Case Study in Detail ` Harsh Singhal is an a accomplished data science leader with over 15 years of b technology experience, including leading teams of data scientists and other c technical professionals at LinkedIn and Netix.
Harsh joined the Koo leadership d team in late 2021, to build out Koos machine learning and AI practice as well as e lead all data science and machine learning teams.
His specialist areas are natural f language processing and computer vision.
The Business Challenge h HARSH i : Koos goal is to create world-class social media experiences for its target p audience individuals q who do not consume content in English.
289 r To realize this goal, I was tasked with developing innovative user engagement s features to enhance the personalized experience for our diverse user base not t just in India but also in Brazil, Portugal, Nigeria, and others.
u Knowing that other countries, such as China, could build large social platforms, v and make them relevant to global users, inspired me to join Koos mission.
Context-dependent issues x Addressing existing global platforms bias toward English-speaking digital natives y HARSH : We can oen take a digitized life for granted, but there are millions of people around the world who are just beginning their online lives.
For instance, hundreds of millions of people who speak only Indian languages like Hindi, Tamil, Telugu, Kannada may have access to WhatsApp and Facebook, but are not widely exposed to micro-blogging or social media where they can express themselves in their own language.
e handful of global players that dominate the social media landscape leave non-English speaking communities underserved.
So, providing a microblogging platform for users to express themselves in their native language is at the core of this business challenge, but for long-term success, you need content that aligns with their interests to keep users coming back.
HARSH : In the early stages of launching a social media platform, if there arent enough users interested in a particular topic, such as sports, then even if a sports celebrity joins, they might not nd an audience.
is lack of engagement could discourage them from creating more content.
erefore, its crucial to have a strategy to identify and onboard content creators who are relevant to the users interests.
e goal here is to create a self-sustaining model where personalized content attracts users, which in turn encourages VIPs to join and create relevant content.
is engagement then attracts more users and creators in a virtuous cycle.
290 Approach A three-phase approach was taken.
Phase 1: Determining prioritization and design Feature development and language prioritization HARSH : My team set out to build a new feature, which we named Topics, that would allow users to explicitly state their interests, for example, entertainment, sports, or politics, when onboarding.
We needed a way to map users to interesting proles and determine what types of celebrities, inuencers, and thought leaders to onboard, which in turn would generate and present relevant content to our users.
When faced with a project like this, the key rst step when focusing on speed and eciency is to reduce the complexity.
So, one of the dicult decisions I had to make at the start was to choose between taking the feature (Topics) live in all languages versus the top one or two by volume of users, which were Hindi and English.
While we may have lost momentum on other languages, the decision to prioritize these two was the right one because if wed done it all together, we !
would have delayed the entire launch.
Building it in one or two priority languages " enabled us to scale it out aerward.
# Data labeling and quality assurance $ HARSH % : While English and Hindi were prioritized, the team trained LLMs & on human-labeled data to categorize Koo content into topics across 10 Indian ' languages and 10 international languages.
( To get the data to the right level of readiness, we deployed an in-house team to ) review and manually label content in a process called human-in-the-loop (HITL).
0 Our in-house team collaborated with our community leaders (who build and 1 manage our language communities).
Over several weeks, one leader from each 2 language category reviewed and manually labeled the content.
291 3 We developed Topic classication using Natural Language Understanding (NLU) 4 technologies.
ese technologies include LLMS, for example, BERT, and more 5 recently ne-tuned open source LLMs like Metas Liama2.
6 is process produced a few thousand pieces of labeled content per category, 7 which was our gold standard dataset.
is was used to train the model, which 8 was then used to classify the content on the platform.
Oen, in this process, the 9 models cant classify some content with certainty, so its then taken back to the @ original auditor to provide a clear label.
is quality assurance helps the model A improve over time.
B Open source collaboration for model development with NLP C HARSH D : To enable Topics for Indian languages where Natural Language Processing E (NLP) research was F nascent, we collaborated with top Indian research groups G like the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Chennai, and AI4Bharat to come H up with a solution.
I I am very proud to say that our language model (nicknamed KooBERT) was P open sourced on Hugging Face to spur further research.
Phase 2: Building proof of concept R Rapid testing and iteration S HARSH T : Our culture U is similar to the early stages of Meta, where we move quickly V but with a heightened sense of awareness.
Timeline constraints are coupled with W limited budgets, so for proof of concept, I recommend getting 20 people in your X company who use the product, and then dogfooding (testing the technology on Y ourselves internally for quality and experience before a wider audience) the results ` of the model in Excel or in a simple spreadsheet as a small proof of concept to a see what it looks like.
is means giving them the output that they would see b on the platform if they were users.
en, get their feedback.
If you do it for 20 c people and it works 80% of the time, I think you have something there.
Take it d to market with a rapid testing and iteration process.
292 e We went through a wide range of tests, including following new Topics, how the f Topic presents in settings, does the content under the Topic look right, plus the g number of miscategorized content instances.
h Our ML team and QA team did this for well over a week, around the clock.
i Given the number of languages involved, we didnt have people speaking all the p languages on the team, so we roped in friends and families to do walk-throughs q and test it in dierent languages.
is involved a fair bit of coordination but r there was a lot of positive energy s around this as it was an exciting, high-impact t feature for Koo.
Some things we learned included: Role of human observation : Unless we looked at the output of any model or algorithm, we didnt ship it; we didnt take it to production.
Of course, standard model evaluation metrics, (accuracy, false positives, ROC curves, and so on) are fundamental.
But once past that, we look at the content that the model is predicting or classifying or recommending to see if it looks right.
Creating a set of internal power users : Every time we had a new algorithm or feature release, we checked the feature among employees, across our teams (Data Ops, QA, and ML) who were all engaged users of the platform.
ey test a feature pre-launch as a user would experience it.
is gave us a powerful pre-launch feedback loop.
Sourcing the voice of the customer : Aer a few weeks post-launch, we actively sourced feedback from our users, which provided further, valuable color on how we could iterate and make the product better.
While we are always very metrics-driven (with the model, engagement, KPIs, product performance, and so on), this human element of quality assurance tells us stories; for example, we learned that there was a strong sub-group that was pleased to nd poets on the platform, so this became an interest area we introduced on Koo.
We also used automated testing tools to increase eciency and accuracy in the testing process.
293 Figure 27.
1 Snapshot of KOO Topics features (Source: kooapp.
com) y,66%)N ff`|#fEAOaFGwQG8t?
[A@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@AyCV.
BY=qFYpTq8t?
[A@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A{PV/dY=qFwz%bYbKtpks{MV&l1hhopA u,NvYI?
fokQ`eU K'6|L.
H-Wj-;7 5Em:C1qp(A_hmDa ofU`cS1U5Ec{U4MIz !
K}oR(9h8W<@P|r +*O` rb+*O` rb+*O` rb+*O` rb+*O` rb+*O` rb+*O` rb+*O` rb+*O` rb+*O` rb+*O` rb+*O` rb+*O` rb+*O` rb+*O` rb+*O` rb+*O` rb+*O` rb+*O` rb+*O` rb+*O` rb+*O` rb+*O` rb+*O` rb+*O` rb+*O` rb+*O` rb+*O` rb,hf 6 E,Y=qFGwQZiKeUWewN.
&H }byySWDk-?
]QT;)kjMXako+k:FpN%$|XjL*nN1-l-gp-sO47<Qc6HO|FksX]PDWOv[Aaqn'x>omc<-u^o,Wvm;DU:jUW VZw9kcK}*{aX{<Z{]|JfY,Oc7xsz9w~:IY'9J2.
wst]ut{]SU $gK}oR(9h8q-{~M/9P~OZ~=hfzOZgg=h=hOZgg=hfzOZgg=h=hOZgfzOZ~=hOZgfzOZ~=hOZgfzOZ~=hfzOZ~=hfzOZgg=hfzOZgg=hfzOZgg=hrW 39Ull"GY=qFYpCz[#1 j`-Qpw [TMUEt X0CkcsZsw89tL7*Yx:TlRI#"kpGdr>9-R^Q~jYja4E5[XZmuANM7A[q]#DDfl';Pd{~<M tm-X.
})}MX~yNrw--v|*#uiT#xRIOl'lfhf>E+/UuM:ibKY]LTPa{8e` r;V%1TE7ov-X11hmc9I*>Fl;f<jg[fyU>ebVh4oomMKL3;R'K!
=f"10%Q"|3CxYK0`U;|&K,nD3t90F`(BPr${gn_(AA)&Vssw`5Im&4t#b-Aa:}Tu0H3l<9(H+h ~8C8f1 !
DH* gW4@@@Z E,Y=qF<]*@Ad5OyX-l9#-`}/3'XY("[in6zi eK/2<5NZ65| |J5O E lc&6f.
bi+qXngrnjv(QJKxRgy[.
TaLSy]^>:S2!
s YfV%}tL[{B[%6DYy]&/x{ 9si wk4z9 C[c ~q<Z G^V=%TU]JDLG,Lu'ha[[z~)TS5V/a_,_/-h$n=i1uWW'[V:pZ@<aUU0yFju^<STUsUinWp@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@AQev3!
5/4tqh<J01>bWI_Q<p60=f7qEynx<8g_BJOTCxfGiAQPp"Pq"Sg Lmf+T8JzwH P;~ h"m<p454G#eC%h } XwD5xGoXOj15O,q +"-/]Qfmu.
(9S B_HXo<+1tN/8u1L)s9=*6esS(q{T,nNY6N0 Xu{h|4yx]z=im Ye5U|HF057TXrs+VkE+_Qgr]y"{lxKr-[L)Y,9hl}t)$tl'YWqC#VU2Yrs#Xkwf!
U]jMZ<8oL2?
3p+o M3)ikAq'vudVJ+]5 EuNh76g,;Si.
i%5H(YI3%n; K,D7Im3j&Ij ql:~q#cL7E]v*AmeIlot1^KkC7wo!
,1wLhJYxcSbn)|RN[x#[M.
pI7tvQ>1(OU9D3 Nn u4}lL%q`yAX_D:9 e.
eTV dkY#6ia]b6fn+Lt nD^PV/dY=qFG OQm~h6n|?
&2u6mZwFjvzj+N7RG@TnD>z]U]IUV6HND-<Xv>"CKGnD>YtvMqpKcha#D!
u@/75SN`yNV5@{ ";m:[@2xq~A tTUUIU @S:q [/wCZj11,/h{naM1LEQsCsi F4q{dQe=T6 X4?
r{LXfj6#fxZFN3UR}7Hx%Y/1a97_=e(b|hjg.
]5&KiSHy-rlsJ:"GB.
3Xw "YgZ@@Zf{s g2Vln b&1o?
)Xe, !
K}oR(9e/5~Z]mt*vARrL8Njq<3'kRRxtIAOI.
v{m7VlgTt1 ]*4Qblv9xb_Q4Qf]S}iM<76H~Y:ntEgmn"|tQT3Y=:$n,b38 iKq!
8A*SO)/ ss]t~U-(0V"|4rD^^~Z@y$GWW[qdXvJ9,;f$YJ*vQTv0sf}z?
** 6A3ni> p.
KG[ZZF6ZJ~o~}VF~/L7 .
[,%{KUA[N8M=9U Y-Hkme>y{x<g%}5<V7lueH0w~D8XGub b+`*;54r"W5uQ<fpCr~q/lukg(kB0ldylt#ioAir$q$N,6TaAo8O|3$vchcCprI,:p16ki=~.
m(I4t9-`v>Y2i#X(nu%e m%j7B<.
o=7pj~LCd9lz "BT@A{[=A[eY=qFYpeDJ.
TRac-s ;3]vXVZ]q<>[_4&i; zi-VNOD7f#*vwst?
]mFn{]wR1+# 9Y*tK6p^j#~kYdqwn%WD^M]e!
"8uJyijd#{O3wK E"c wp}45'c2v;YIo^SpgxmShCGT.
Tu_U`{De;2.
'"lN*)'QLS(Q^%Xzg7m-j #0PuCX:R 1Oeq%gto.
:zNCy p"Pq"Qg qAh},Q|r^K#>T" FM4h?
*Dp= haqss:H/p=ICl ][9n0-a}mFr|n8Y If[y&4sf|Ahl#KHsdrp#mDzReMkdmp>].
:'N3:-*URP)W"52=MO!
4USb<|2;[%L;05acSv*RWW,H]D;7, 6t^){e],2fEPhsw|V50+4`-wHY>*yqGAg?
mVR84szzTfn;`~_f}A.
_R P78rae_-WD{IsVn=sU= jzANoxw%tz9-lo|6I{%1~R4-h6b897d7dgC{H!
:Z*mfI5I#3`G8V.
H|c }{VXC-[Z5FqwrfWW),dl*IH.
W qoa/7e~QGhM5 ukrxhgc~][x61WD`v -_Y=qF<]*@@@A:"lj}z d:-H<$8A@@@@@@@@@@@@fYA:H>^PV/dY=qFYpTq8t?
[AAeikqv[FeTR6P9K@/gTR6P9K@/gTR6P9K@/gTR6P9K@/gTR6P9K@/gTR6P9K@/gTR6P9K@/gTR6P9K@/gTR6P9K@/gTR6P9K@/gTR6P9K@/gTR6P9K@/gTR6P9K@/gTR6P9K@/gT X;-vC=9(/pg+a?
Y=qFG ]*@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@AQ oE-ll"GY=qF<]*AB p@@<W# f zSh H)h gh+AN h* G2 f:-H -_Y=qFYpk5/m-4pSa8ThX~}R/ 2*fHfO~n0L:WG)^K6.
mAG5mA{[M-2>@roaOSd-"F%fdTAAciY/Ev4xf`6oN&:fQ, .
'I"G<nMC@;,1z>a*JiL6R2?
&,R;l X-/{^21HXM+qtYd1"7D3hw>W.
tUi)GI=faOdVSP,:Ltlf"eCDUOWUGQ Ci".
kHVaf4kuFr>ZeySk;oweUi:=X0UX3}a8F2#kxWA4EAQ7[7RKl5U]MBK[vYKw(F=7Mwc]~^Vxb3wW]2=C&6<n~.
lu=M=86`|-^}2UoM T9c^f3(LY|MD(5_1]0OndN(6QI=NC2x tdI=16w?
uOnxu`]>1 5[M}C8[Q,>M_:y@#w%'tg&(1 wr.
+6v0]F+tD$ [-V,: I7SW[(d-q3*VMrY -) aNN3b878j*)*#=HX<Yp-ZUIy3B~mnBiNFFTlsKni|q%x[`YMB3cKX@-+yD1@6M#+s=UX)4 "/ g9Y i`[/(VH{d-To ax tO+V<E+erZXurI%c0s#-gh(JKr/ 3LWsv:Tw`5wD |E[jnN!
/u58n~BHwA(|Q3#.
"^@py rXMr87"GO[K%5#'1<2X0,x),5fQs4;<[ -_Y=qFwz%jUNzUSVUqik02x)0u-E@+C~uBRSX%r6&/In8m9/b#p}=%/$8;5'W*OBX].
6SIn l2ZZ % hZ.
++"'p$}3fN00SQPmu([-Y5~"79Xbi0t5d@%sI6VL=1yT#~|aa ZP/8yX [}Q0s[^*kZ5pci| )a1_rk8VEScx%ZVqf{'dnlkz-n9SXAgiW0IARntuMC)&=7WZBA){[y-' /1cf0jrH3,ULDqwC#-=;~[mevscJiQ$S38DZxn{3Px<]JtYff&NUxk!
O41FeNsA;QioQ7"QL@ALKwC+_M!
5srV-Pm J3<;#-053 uqS,Q{N/mk!
2mlCg~51,Pv6PqnEX$Qc.
YzR8U]lf,.
lsjsEjzT(_A%[#@y7ZP uBKk =75n0jk!
EUenw:#bD.
jZ^6r c4{m[E$8kx6M*,pnVA-Z`q|P~rArfI<c:wtxmMf( '>9gnW{+;Mlg%r/uCS4L"5<,Qwgv).
9mhc>|2uV 'ON*3Y^9XYOpKs-XyHeD]v67Sje(b_:G<;Q3!
GY-`LTAnMfoq p2K,D8rmiZ^e;>46[pIY$qbiiMzHXIbxsf6_I.
GPe@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A{[=A[eY=qFG ]*A&[Db: A$LdkD#Kl%BNX|Z(j%)$OYATSDaKnAAX5F@tnA@@@AO0-6Khx2vHdZ#Pqi-tZXAI-TR*_I$1|f:H]m6Rek[~f%hS[(K-4p6O9E4Pkknh)Ly y<{MLke9wve%6MkdkZ2p?
'**7UFh/v::!
S <q>VwXth^<BC(qvC[/Zn4)e'J8<c,)-ivQ7xn9%U)m_ sg-<U ck9`Gf{z3: e4,?
uZX4X?
CIXcFWlgdt&x,OgHf{"hvH.
Ml62k(!
fYk58+Y{CKO6FcXO |bD& >*h)cTSV {CP}GGG6B:9s ='gfy %`$M~S: ]U^_kSGLl9,P?
m`7Is,?
nFQY#d~"kXhh1XpllTj#61?
:KMDndm ("UzRPVUf'Iu7Psk3 kuMRj:fhsytErUV'#Q3G<xjbed,|<1sA' 6w'fgf" kvxXntGI%Lm2"8: im*c2>Gj(9U60j`T" |81'ZXc|e;7>>]veW!
uB,:iNBo@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A{[=A[eY=qFG OQsr93n,_;)d{yT-G2IGAS$yT|-E2IHA{$yKe(eDY(YdUpTq8t?
[A@@@@@@@@@@@@A oi>.
vijX),U]LDOIjpK+NDA$8ug[mjQwwc 8UU<i7z{F+!
Yr ^`|i$3H3] yeg0t_ ]c3 02:-*hP_47A%4{<8XHU]-8^{ueuHK2ph ugm=T*4AY mfcdc^rO6fTuFh+K^5#.
Mf7 Z+l$9o~4t)fqU>3]iZi !
Xe, h%7[Y!
dk$ NYk&&jd|G)'j3<dr7$@|O/66kTu/&JSA[XefSu@!
d@<Bm,,)55G:<x/,nTFKEj$xoJ(4{-ysfV /0qSMNZIvf=.
;}efCE{Iw>,Xe8H[]sJHTenMiT.
8)fvw,T fY5@gq:j9T1MYhv.
B #A|{@_;lv[gNa1BG>* m25[Xdvu5U"N$vi)aOIf-MNC#,i 1PMZI s,:RSwZlvG6idFGK05xnJI^<8df8n#/pg+a?
Y=qF<]*@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@AE!
Ap~+)/1o *^y_ /pg+a?
Y=qFGwQ4JfdZv} Y#3.
O"74< 'T*| [+( >PACU FF9h9 |?
#Y%/9I3}<mjd]n{ PP4fNA/(:jCcx P~LikP~ @@@@@@A'fxQZ$qC%ry>_b5j/$$2@$2@$2@$2@$2@$2@$2@$2@$2@$2@$2@$2@$2@$2@$2@$2@$2@-Ab _7AUf ,/pg+a?
Y=qFYp'Y']P B]tt/8ZgQ<QY#i,N@(Wh->pR}UUcnhw IR8[<L^]TsO#uly:5<T}aIi`D=y<TWE^{qN(MA])n|Dx1"l^>}YFVO@D]y3{IRT GzXqYQ[Y3q/rsXY:!
E:Jr9Hl-sq;9)%1ZX/K%]LIit78qsto]p]><i5Vf!
ueMJ'TK>G JyV<EF Q_*by%n[ykv%ko4.
:]u(oT)8WjM5eDR6vtbw9%B<n{Z=Pju 3>8%b,E&!
[%JE|8=nzBN~` AT_eC=cD&G=]P=p6G zvhMyubL_Y*`bige4ywtpYBbH:UN97<8i {#|!
Mm<V(nHk6)-{] D2|3s[dlIkDsTd|gO65}GW )rm];v&M!
pq-k~c.
rg*v,ntDn:fIw.
Wlz4^[$$r-L6-KyKYL7M<=p:yqxg| |:8,{,xql<rS[`sC&;[T.
V,{#{uZNYV^} n_L2$.
n`#v~QHQ$sqqx>B=*I[lW:ks=E[" Q",d/tC#.
:d5,nIy8W>zeItmRh~WuWfqCTw5UdsfLfL5MW[| KF4N:C%IUE`,fda+ycwu,pu4,(]d2i=;{m;FGOx73I9E=dXX Mgee1[4m:'8J8$,2 ?
`p"Pr-:8S^T[.
'jrHA{[=A[eY=qF<]**%fvV@+]#,&s9[/hYB-8CLoYHfCNbZS:E}cK9WO4+$pmf3U1i_*[3Znp-GAP?
)Lr1+j+Mq,+eCcyEJc/zN}Sr+(&dzfbRm,3M hwGP#2Xrt1,'asiMZ@Se:lH 28pp9zpFgxL`7;'[<j6z:{rw>YEps.
TYJz{E@).
Q:n|rg5q^,xIki"]^iYs3!
^T44mvf68$M#x.
Sk2XriAa#F8t{Ixzm 0SZvG7u4*y`IMc~VQ[5= al7 3j34ln Wx:p.
Sgmv,tif9 bAi'3/]vj6wj[-} &X62C30^"tszrI.
M` lytsKjV_ttd@2?
BSwKHHm[FaKwYF%c.
6 v()3=Jc% ?
mye4nXjgu;1;7w#, ,_.
C hkK^2{ o]t,6|uPRT:*5 '@&MD9XDGz*Fv< ?
6K3o0hw:&?
*:I~q^;%1VCOsY4oe#ZNp>!
YBCw=bOsW,k%m{ -NnXuNt3vmj:K}ui!
(`0YAKTb;d12Fzr0:};P2jyF3r3{`wEeD (+I758a.
,<e`h]yx6HxxR1e`_.
Of_hB29kC_n`G9,u$9i9RUd'#|su6MmC$jT !
,9dw&Y>"Z&MM4VKsI3w>M^(a;R 0`H^>Dgt!
yW 7(brufF~-q&[ 5oO&ONA ~Uk<i6+k)PquQiIs<sNe IADJzawo-$s,PrEuO?
YN%yS`@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Al~vwj#i(z~#Y=qFYpen~rIVaamiPxVvn<.
;fe un`h5>atKSlOK2l;xQGfX,K?
B>_AP?
,W%j'RT P)L"k1vp(6m cZd@?
d;AQ#("d:iL k=qqyx(,l;l:FcpT;3/HP~sD|r7Yik;AmX0#(-tasy9zJ$*) %/TQQ@YN9f[>I'2w W(CcX-v8[YAG)*l-; q'Nhd5 aMw^y+)EtHkyJxSDDq kuU,X-Ug9f I_V Ti3h:B=LTF2rTbfKc.
]2n,96J/|)LDxe*1U-2_{OO&v3%_V=QE:ShSTUp.
eKIDcsNG~Tq0fiJc!
-G}N;|+J(2*fuC+eUxss1 *cI+)b'XDgzF<OV/pg+a?
Y=qFG O[Rbx.
85Z(a'BwFazI8JF BKSi5>AVbkUI7*Xf/1Eqs)Y!
fdD]]qG`/b_]&g=bdS'Cnuel1xdd a4h1a:]zcuF132N^(Z/f#WB27Z7AD]x@A KOvSKTr9d {FlV}e,FG3#{9<5uO[H(kAu4LfNddnYs{mZ,T/hs*;6OGgbAkqLWX*#F3u8/<2;f6!
X/39vZ_1qZEa[9edy5Ilc<f[+Xr-I5"C;# w7u,9!
ttsif s9wWdB{=jDe|Qdzx!
ghgIi>KEE_5,69dYx%qy*%6GIX_(X68rKf{,:/VvnFSNga(3.
DQ;L(FB}9kwX6]a-L:dF;-g6JuA,80]u|{2R99B!
{IUO8{XFm$,K&.
J 3be9F@s='5f1VmR3Z39ga/BFjCYXcatGbKKi w|`36jkjY$6i/oIGGICX)bN2ppBNMq'fX1EM%MU=6cV s-*#aZ*1UP I[<}4A;0@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A'fxQZrG8t?
e:XMw CKxJNT_)7v4TSuNW9Q+X8xy'&SiQXf9s<+v2n .
ce ]r p[nFyJhmmf,zf$irgsactlbi$^sc|bUWaT&{N4SL17lGi"k5iN=n[+1vk`amUuF^$0]617t-&;RcxkO)<t;k~r6]OJ,R'HGUS<HXacy3T7"kjcfnn; 2+=hNLFdy8pWG{5XQ^h=XQU>m4Ux'2(-;8 'q>{M/mVt9R#`m/I tT}#w6v8ZbTT:;1Lw&sd:H;Yi%&U;3YUFD74;?
ewLU]1U/hkF5n-L<f|S&KCh)k(p{a1n#1<[M"oMSS<bb]#LLr/fF bi0+%-#Z_&pdbm]ux[XbsiYkXE>.
Q L34{FQfSq2-FVviojiTkBNG.
<uf}'ibM-:9y`@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Am~vwji(z~#Y=qFGw[Rbx.
5Ztphp AAe^W#-|es|wu^V_E@ikt%N{SDN</Yw_|P3-s6x95+:Ldm kF@(6-yd^+(F`vl%r> JSaOFfq%+mm83l GNg[>~8O:5CTdD8,MQyn@%.
jCQ=o[h4WRu@pY 0mne';QPKo0=Y}eWW8#?
q(OSniG8XZA>60y:fEn4u+o#F2Iw'OKL 1YOZ|MVE.
LX3/jH5-B]ZW;[Mqq|y2'ku&uSimm$,[.
VQe3e4^"9`nT"-v1x>w#jd'',3YBIq/<wZ !
*G+v09y6iauWKNG<1<5 / 3S[!
>8|96FXR{k#6ano$Oe {!
iA lWvshO!
G{MzsNv@~b8>~/5wdJvbYEnvgS<$L+AGRHZB-Rbc29?
mSmCv=Y~R<kL)#j)YYq$pd2j<aoZ9<eSm(veW<T8O/dJ|@8)53CLicJ4Z3Q8fFm{[{1.
'`8ep18De65Y.
&iopjZMpbjnIIduk%w=K0D?
7o9#`p"Pr-Qt+f-J3>_t1XoI$ Br;e.
DNiw'<Z39al =MliZqy[WiLLi|MvfbcI=_VXp#qISlYs~&t=gTU=LDL{Ws-bb<3:OxyiK?
|C]Kk2;{)?
^W u73NxM;v_w26zj|0uviw||Wk'kdMf8^&-8Jp{b(pf:]/TOj.
]n<[40*m+mDf:7qJm*tk5-$h$nX#qa4ZpMUSFYN$ElF{GW.
K5FtdsW1K9jWDDbGgUQ+o*Sj>z}hHvZ[ R55;f;C'IK lCcsN6}DEQxj&&Fi1TMXY) k~&5iadlg4>v:fS3/mU;J-}]IYfsr_kCi n$.
]rgzegZ!
i`#vgC&^n"o@ ];; 5}jA{[=A[eY=qFYp'Y']P B^PFDf ==Y'2OI-U,U^3DeeYA!
T8K(:I;}5m>Ps@',dJ[toYuk-/`TU=L 8 $ LV!
{d{fXHB#wY0 J(13F[#7~|b nSS F7zb3NKUt98cKf6MW({ZyAW6JFUD-.
J3wGnV+iq'-6im6[up!
w (m]5, ]j9R3p$a [pRGRFZ}HK|.
E:h#;u2X"'8z;&7;N]Q(m5u=f(j7U,ChO-T*4G_QbI#Khcu {"Yu= )jd#Cy(,<`Bak8.
^f,'fm#Sn2/Vg;jH X.
,PYGI^F9d}tW7RFk#bGvvY$1nSH|vb=54s!
q <B O=xOUI]=* #~ieD[{IM2dLc:PDJzaw'orG8t?
[A(96?
e:XM|IYa]]r,0={EC2 %>x 1y.
Y,5wdv3->[no>ZJ -_Y=qF<]**%f~vV@+]#& Tp79e?
SY@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A]"OR#.
`HC%nSS^T[.
o>ZJ -_Y=qFG Oq,^;1/30J9+]n!
2%c",O#wTK@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ABa<fp[e;ebuw|,>e8[YAG)*l-oCxZ%^PV/dY=qFYpeD7>[TKM)h3sksG:U:j(SLG>AA+%w7#V2=#P2=#z2=#z2=#P2=# NB6Xe8P[kNxPb( dz Gdz G()?
2 z Gdz G dz( dz oA<XeLAXA@A@A2=@A@A2=#~dA@r=2=@AW#PS#P~owsvelR[Tw9*[E=rMGC%6j_it+0Sag^)7bbK)7.
/(rzbK)7.
>Zm[u; o*?
YY=qF<]*@AgWi53L8R"t~/R(d'C7%nd'C72%nd'C72$&=.
|~y7q2|~y7q2|~y7q2|~y7qsL<> LIc<No%K9#Aw$&8>xSOiY'&y7PiLniLniLniLniLniLniLniLniLniLniLniLniLniLniLniLniLniLniLniLnO x& x& x& x& x&7wjgu{Gwjgu{Gwjgu{Gwjgu{Gwjgu{Gwjgu{Gwjgu{Gwjgu{Gwjgu{Gwjgu{Gwjgu{Gwjgu{Gwjgu{Gwjgu{Gwjgu{Gwjgu{Gwjgu{G?
3=BA`=+,TfE1G2Pr*,JoB@h(>9,^L rX@y0ba%K/&9,^L rX@y0ba%K/&9,^L rX@y0ba%K/&9,^L rX@y0ba%K/&9,^L rX@y0ba%K/&9,^L rX@y0ba%K/&9,^L rX@y0ba%K/&9,^L rX@y0ba%K/&9,^L rXAQM&~6 lzhm+fxZ%^PV/dY=qFYpTq8t?
[gl-9AF<OV/pg+a?
Y=qFG ]*@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@AQ oE,m*QK) ^:>ZJ -_Y=qF<]*@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@AQC%~xl((-9AF<OV/pg+a?
Y=qFYpTq8t?
[gl(NH:CHzN~8o^Rkhg3ZNl[1+1s6%tScE iP1u5vf !
96fS3DU:O^lf4DU1V(,*h5 nFgV$PWEm|Mt;StCO5=7v1s0LLFYmZ1*IrE'$MMO Ij[m|iG;.
$D6:J("c^}l4Z$:v N|<sW46i3LN[_WZiNaHi^bs^: 3mZ4u46XlIkuFj6Iy9U3bovb1{E|/w)hsZRFcc5F:<<J4f-<9iGqd4 +"1B.
o[XUSTxOR&mq lAGRntUgc{.
f N0f-3jvHL^x:7C]k{[kfI)htNx ri(=xuo83ul qR5x-nc2 11.
,Wt}qUOX!
ydfJuILM/UrZq=L&_e :zCC%l`kf[=xj"g&&58~b<3eKqvKY1szA&:STU-Xonp)N~u}{5tFib'MSMSh"df1S&N# OIF LLI/YI%}MUKp|CN+8=xsS(LLvK4m>$/7@(qf.
j)^/:phl:klibTn"i< /f&if#LD9Y4vZueEXEe#s{As3;yebH/W{UsM4DMKSmZX= >U^ixui36*mxVZ+$$6Ff8NVSKH3wl8jH"]h9 wx!
x[5xqLNLEC>!
REO=t1Yt7j`136:pNq"-1un(fqe<oxfCAr,SUQ33NXLL-9AF<OV/pg+a?
Y=qFwz%a8HcF4=RV_ks_^&h-,w>xH8bG9veF~,Scx)5v3b9MGMpT6Xsk= :JP^Zue] 44-G}KqaG05X|!
g;Vs@@(:O*7yls<Ms)XeZ?
Fq`MGx}#XX]!
bt`u1W7oW6Sw0f7ndR<)1ld:Pp&'v f8W RUUj:MRK h'_tAEdtWKZ%WX=v|q XBPr*t+g91(m]q>[u)l2K[#^=] p3;}+1ubc=MDxZM3'l{*&>Aw+U%)EM'>L]&Vh2dhmTcY-=pc4KOCz@1i'wkT54tgfWOYdctWvu2n [D5__)1b<W_oTdccW-8LMZQs,K/=CW7nG_,.
l{CNeX 8Lbcezb9];-M4oZXj.
NHFf8 dzwOspf)Sh[DblV_j7 `x`x6C,tkHNYsWr1'.
4kr_ZE5Wq45qN.
6[5%}," Opkr)w3kcs3[vFxSLDN#Hez/xn*KIr|~N1<8v43m2j!
nw6jh d=uc wSU;}Q1xMVLEbM}Ec 49=5u{nL3qLQMn=tN[[X<E-Z !
45v{6' D}Sjpi+5Tp7{/KpJFMq=ha{^^:B810<UUSL|]aSbMq:Fpn0#UE`RT5,{V.
1UM|=f&:"P9AiwK,W]Y-kahxY7?
Y7Jq&1"rLSxOgSS4QMTQj^xo[q~]8{Uj*@;c<gchD^8/:TQx6REOYUx$s5q6JT")b8iu{i"XmIIp19uly'v1+Nn1iVV mUvoZ1m&x6:QqS,gi[,aZ"i/9ja5UVv1]*Ce)"k2Iv%w|m{"fx^rULDM&c/kcH^+kFE,o8~^e#XPL|8/8x"Yn0S]54H7iW33F4DL6umDDEXwZ;Fb]i/zgulBgliwDk fhZmyo]_s(iHhncz[M])K2SM%397[J2:ZZm>;Vo4k}/Yawae4YgRlxU{)8zExZ/]s?
CxZ%^PV/dY=qFGwQ#--Mvl$HqY ` .
n0/md 8?
vSaP<Bt/#XQD>FtGhwg!
]+{n#Z}M*y!
-9fyi}8mNv7$L sW:;h4q UV[*cY+|"9co@o:XvV+tucbn*Wkrm=<;6;-_<sts&9ujUukeM}]8h :GU;{VqesXoqv0uU6:puc&VrfXWtf&[gc|omfgfyaDkfcp6g#@[EyT>Ffm.
i*t5-xnS-#k!
gf +H7i*5 rl2#z8u EZM5+wknexVtV9]4my bma;~ "m5oSa=6E3Gv!
owc$n1AsG?
2wViaz-)b}L >revn< XXMbjQSS}sGwG.
wU1k"oG[#'7kM :+Wr4C2xb{j6aMjO-l922X5v:7>d=%E-.
e>g3Xvt|:kYnL)IHXLqa9?
&( 8hq[m:zC3'U4~isaWYGttn%9fcj AQX6uw8n<Y#mpi.
2ck}H Fbe`Ts oE,m**t+AW] F6}:fQIL8`trFea<{9;GamLt49e F7eZS>9swLSQ:GzbQE;%Mf@5t27G9;VF<L46n]UuG2]%sTfD #]I* +zoy)-V%TDZ,hC aYR+j nL<|s6Nf-^f7gL}j(UX^ !
bmbX$vnf%,s7.
9pWWe{uNY=Yu+nZ3EgH 0L2S,nm;+F;D1MimUu3!
6<<GjUU^ajzr1--k"fjbxb;"i?
b1tK]qV K 4Q0vo^b<87S3i9v9VVxS]sW"5} W_qqfuxr-v)x!
{40 QFj[u:^z*&DMpkpv1.
*9GsXzrnS;bb0h6nff7Okos&>5Y"-eiZsiX;F"#Zf`omx4!
W06FKGu( tyjnj,}j4wN0f(Mfq(jfbt"i f<g[g{ zX#v7]!
n'uU13T}:+5EXyxDDy_ZMU0.
W '*y97]ppQ%M3zo3 *&c[DLM%Cf8^.
59oyF@h+Jb)"G 1ffso<N=cm}eJw52 /cL,c:5MTaS7kYc-XLEio; [(/l),An/1{HB1*iq4 xaM{E4SzLG)} ;6j!
Sb<J}Z#&ff]]a5TT1hCgV,OhsSP}}$3JZG1uS411Mt1qkUwvJ|qS>O,fH++f:jf8sKWiMSyDgobn%| ;jFX~@nwPsV=8"y1lSu%o01 hE6#q wCUaZ;tN%LZ6"_&6yQ<uXj#Tm3n5w-de,b_M{sow,nn1 uCbl;'/t5QM8t4Efbm{M4tTsDU7uZ3YoW,edTWK0;$s {&DDp:cTifx}:~4US: =_a:U:F4Mz|npV^iZ/]s?
CxZ%^PV/dY=qFYp9P7VO m9<M*Nvz-{.
k|,9by!
*;{:H0Bm3MMLx&?
-ssftqgu5J.
IGC%Ts;Ydjb[or5UI[n`lYvM$wnW%e}CMN_SM]8fe7XG X7>(hrHif#I7+)**00UGc2%:D"]qD>Ho3278N{w,FEZ^R$]g/w&y` u 5:lr}5EDwC(#G+C#2Y!
=l "u_pVQCSUTn9 w,3V6i5 gtAmTa(g3 qKG.
=,;,1ce+govD1 -vSts(kx~"QV/u+xuN2d{q1n:Jj+6Zgnnyb$i;Rz%R>7[i,2Ziac&{qfs;pR$RRT; a%&>aGXVwOFnj*@uHFN q}A1A,$,[9+<;b,s^#IysIJ=SWs!
qtmhiAH.
SO35lg%uHGvCU(E.
0->G%}O-%m,U0J"H9~O~8:NZ,+t_u0E: 9@Ch"S> K0 azQ;/ INqOQe+A[YA?
<UEN%|S`@@@@@@@@@@AnR_O%M;%u<XKY 7>"we8M<bB"=KJ@@@@@@Amu45,%2s-{Vo&on2EU2AT{_ 9`x wH<ZL_]xq_V0c`Z/]s?
1}jA{[=A[eY=qF<]*@ALcpid<C: tk"ks5Yw(4Tw?
[qu Wgy#ou[nd2X{ -{CxH?
*jX)#F1uVNh+>6q4= nYyKosH-.
`$ em6PM`uedt[bGqp` YrTg~;{$H<3.
=%P`U*'G#1'tkt]o} :v=ye C%~yl-9AF<OV/pg+a?
Y=qFGwQG2PrK)'26A:_D~@?
h gW{3=G#bu}G:_D~AL#b U{S:G#bu}G:_D~@?
h gW{3=G#b gW{W:_D~@?
h gW{3=G#bu}G:_D~@?
h gU{S:tG#bu}G:_D~@?
h gW{3=G#bu}G:G?
h gW{S:tG?
h u}G:_D~@?
3}3WI?
-9AF<OV/pg+a?
Y=qFwz%~aV6.
+#Ty9X?
)seQ&R0LG`K9Ty ?
)seQ&R0LGe.
)seQ&R0LG`K*#26uGe.
l<&R0LG`K*#26UGe.
`K*#26uGe.
l<Ty 0LG`K9Ty ?
l<Ty ?
)seQ&R0LCdaa<3~U_ p"P~QS_Z/]s?
CxZ%^PV/dY=qFYp~rf7f/1 _y dH dH dH dH dH dH dH dH dH dH dH dH dH dH dH>$0PY'2[I, !
K}oR(9elW:XM3H(8Qll"GY=qF<]*AHEY%zV t a5H@!
Xt a5H@!
Xt>t@@ABrAMa5H@!
Xt a5H@tATALH@!
Xt a5HA(*r**9p"P~?
:XM3H(8Qll"GY=qFG ]*@t^bWk ;i&wv}$WQEF<6MXMd ?
VkMLo}Zq72Aig?
S{$VkMLo}Zq72Aig?
S{$Zu2V&Ick}c/Iz:StgRF"p]9]];eA2=6X+N}YtSiV]{{-z_N5~&Hc}W3~?
N5~&H7s>8 U_obd}W3~?
Oobd}W7j*It @kss UMfe *D^uIKM#3+rq&s-,[4rvViMS mN5~&H7s>8 U_obd}W3~?
N5~&H7s>8`U_obd}W76Nf/N/6!
:]"+k[*^asp9eU9]lM]*@@@@@@AejJQBPr*t+EEg}us6d> k]XM6pzH']gVTf8)in,FTd1oV`lcWSTt1q =M~ ,dZ9 L9x:+&8JaOK^28<VUSxkeLW_n(l9z&13-STU1>79A14ALXnb+1d 3Ldf|N%_V$L1L^{"U^-4LDvjh(I dR$R5;`~P1n,D,2 ^:>ZJ -_Y=qFYpR?
za^Er?
Q)vVXI#kx 9Pq.
[*lSQVDcDu3ZZ8k%dM.
Y" T|coY4<w)[&S-[67Z;p{sn_+[dVPJyo,psI=n#zDJk,v{/]7t>YE Ic 8^]{tUq><k8m^cvc=~Yqx_be4dnhrY Br9(f]8SvGLHCAqo%MLE_RZ<yZ}<U2RHFGhu6Z%<LipsM`PBe.
5NJLiO|G%)pdV"qww,EWN)VC&J9m5d2t*/c:9 k$ea7>*F}A/"sXtS;$tfP~X!
2Vt(Bz8rRV9o<qi8!
a|85'pe2D7X%>x^fJLg<T3/U6h>c|q0fhs@|9W}Ey)j1<B1g<A#FAQru6>mY_>oZRTEGC%~xG,JrY/zCDYk/tr:ZWj.
nvM[/Js)t&xWiZb5FhIUxkckrU[{lLS0uzJ{8U{o9>3:;"}/{"L&!
c0n)NnWS59Z-2NUOawbm'*AKwZVUVyb],Dib~Mcf6KbgUgKIhvqpuvL;fjuhC/b(_YKSCP%h@s8g>9fQi;6TbnVlGjtzXFne^e"4$S>eJK:U>(MJ(*y{A;v-mSxU&% j=Upc%XtrU|i}%[st4QIrf36~6NW35z-xYt]z d'Zy&6<OxxkU6}j*$: [=fm536S{9_q{Q6DU<tNws(|wM.
cTYu {[0CrGsv51~fgH6;"J56kLwsbvynN;n^twH3`8#,6"{f v>,=YqODk7 jtas8]:UJf,~[mNTiojoOox=BT:SPb$W$zBM[9hMChhUN_V4q)b@`Q*sDq h:xW.
~kUzDDq|Wq1*cYei&sYh(-lMM5n{]UU5kj"b}1fb"#K6J(yOGrs$q:66 6Mk5Q4j1D+.
=Iz'BZIghO%3pmZ{jci(z~#Y=qF<]*@t^bWk>Di?
[ppT%kP]RSMhxkX2-vM3-Ziz%qv5LX)#f,p<6^*^.
&a<J)+MKvk5g9' ;Qu4dQI5H$/`9g$u|n?
u:;`n:[q*+w5EiWG %<Sg4lUL<,ho|AuVlG#k"-v7{~)Zb]1s,s kEU<S26F]Y4|cvy2)bkV[/z+P4{U1la9{gW^Sx :=zzx#qod(-=3w~ -RMf-MV h0ec1itnXsLS6[p~$eqsZ3Q/LQLU<[WmM#Goc`ComfmJ&$*kzQYhmU1}K6w7N7eXJ5-[hheCIK%|ke+Zq_h[yU91!
)$9Ll; Tf8]WSEl2i]|C>1(wj(S>~6m-5tX:^y%g?
6iJXUX2jjyUSFY6:t?
>dj/FYgJ,pKhoM3.
*`ml dtrd~]kLiCZkdR%,u?
C%6/{$`ot"2k%6K Liif%DSI(.
nr}0c?
MdDynRt|JCdEdZ|n/Z->u1DZ5KUPm29i"62&SsibgN6ph8kT8f BPw@cJ-NREe;E5vym#KN`~~~}K2U]?
CwJDvf{:= kWL~F!
2vt(Bz(s%RV9o<Xvjkjc7D3.
xp-)If'Gt_%=$tP3/ wd:2U6tt_o NY ZJa6mo}<2,fLM2 9iWym2+Bs38%4{10J}%=]I)cV4U<_b~miA =E 4{e$wtqX%]v:AW}MM#5_8OJDhUD3i+Ik=i#prG8t~N|$^/&k77b=?
+pzr**9p"P~?
:XM3uqY%7/H|(J,VEPC>s6:,/mF9)s[/LU9hg[;F&aMh@=`95vqm1l$L^fj4}tR{~H+c,m5317c#N$U:^-m& _G?
[_qg[^{U^ci[i6R#]uhMHfCLLY6nSicw_&X`hi62MPKNe5~cbjhu[,1gY} "{~= 7w&a{t{^:F Zb;h5JMQx|3>UL*9(bJ[l79j*G*X:F&UQ4Xl`s+suM]-}MjCsY9sy quF,zJ]+q4OKECj3VWoyY38ucbo"gft]lFXijiHt:{jyk9N/'p97zUuUb")oy66<;*fIc!
(;T BbMg3kOVL)46-t,!
s#drif1}Mn1{dOyw#m@"%y3my ZS>T;Zgg|iA7c11.
,apkE,fG]^OBI5R95a.
z/G{7O<3G|4y7+4,q:K`,Dq'Qa{_7]TL^{-FDMI,"=X,3Z&TLE8s37]s`DD{5vk %<A >k&&P+&tvivW P'ID?
YY=qFYpeDEY%yV!
Zi=,U.
SP<IWjck(5cn%UsW#,N1)ZAb^US%e5=$6)i[wsKVggq7Nd:@l-3,o'^S+j-T2z v-)8NLHGufhzS+;><5Zue<Trzhc`v>&IM1M[l6+u4 fhfoNlUx`*J/z+~UCU_L[N^=vLKY-k9,3>v'3Y,Yr]>FCO130||PI#5-Yw~j{UzDH hi'K X<=l~VKmJ {cdd_YzF))iVW;E;mHrS<f-S^ON}"0DTr~}nhgmK$"VhySSwjiC9[p xP3xT26#c]/*]*|L8<;YRQ3u,GU {#ZM4%kH3i#pF:b5eA~ sq{w73=",UVi*/X4<5{h'1OjfDnQ)HuKhg rJs}4Q+dB[T4e3_,yy/TzL-Mtw:W55Le$==c*q:QK}SG-;adq"v{=Mf.
tQ63=p9YcNkQu8Y`Zw&QGK_O]+2vrM%8Gn3i))ce#TqYLMHVzX)&N9;<4sfIN%O^oW4pz2EVm?
s]L/ ?
^~(lcOEY5xi1kB6vTZ.
+Udn8xN 'T8e]Q~k8PeoIX81u, i_=7BY,|YUo&RjPSECKoh6sXcpxswE,~}ZFTkF4:<Hd*4T2St:H'2T9SY[G: K}ot 6tks6bKxJ#FAE_O@@@@@@@AejJQBPr*t+ux#?
Pea6o5G,?
sB:n36rD3-u1T|E!
8X`zjf"2,s93='%C,q%xsIgk~nM,I R ZU qY]gwp0"sLEUOr*kLmj,]qR855)gp~ERckyV"pfb!
Wgj$X0<kvC<3X6Q2B=6 e[2GOJ|F7x.
cA7)ESb_pGc>!
|P~ oYXbW P'ID?
YY=qFG OQ#fZ5OZbX%<^o_Evs Xjs}U~/j<4w5r9>3I{U_O8^R}G1Wx75r9>3QqU cLnj'w}U~/jgsW)ri4'*d_X;&xf0*oFFcO3Nu]N-Q2eu!
sse+(l|-vBBW0DfV:s}U~/jg75r9>3QqU O8^j*G1WxcsW)>j{S<I{U_O8j{S<3{U_UcLRs}U~/jgsW)W9>3QqU cLnj'sU~/jgsW)>j{S<I{U_O8^R}G1Wx75r9>3QqU cLnj's}U~/jgsW)v{-U_sg> 960iD-g]W `BsWpRZ(6gr'gj{T[sW)>j{S<JCf?
x75r;>3;I{U_UcLRs}U~/jgw5r~%LRQKVJ Q>A%T3T=4z]ekUVg[wv(UDTq8t?
Y=qF<]*@t^bWkh3@@@@@@2hh fh,7W)B" oE,-j*t+EgQqU E,Y=qFYpR?
z^-;TTOxG13ftiTJ<`n&gu?
I7>X/E2Ib|4O)M<Lo}X_ 7Sd}O3iS$yV,M$S`n&gu?
I7>X/E2Ib|4O)M<Lo}X_ 7Sd}O3iS$yL80& n&lu!
wpQVY_>_ZRTEGC%~xG,JVE{NH?
>WgWg9>Y@pf{aWg9>Y@pf{aWg9>Y@pf{aWg9>Y@pf{aWg9>Y@pf{aWg9>Y@pf{aWg9>Y@pf{aWg9>Y@pf{aWg9>Y@pf{aWg9>Y@pf{aWg9>Y@pf{aWg9>Y@pf{aWg9>Y@pf{aWg9>Y@pf{aWg9>Y@pf{aWg9>Y@pf{aWg}29M=^:>ZJ -_Y=qFGwQ?
za^UPGt~.
biW62<k+k4q6cz553z3='3z3='3z3='3z3='3z3='3z3='3z3='3zl?
s/[X$XkxD#FV,7W9e">KFh?
Gg,"`%Yr8<=Gg,X9EK# `py{,"`%Yr8<=Gg,X9EK# `py{,"`%Yr8<=Gg,X9EK# `py{,"`%Yr8<=Gg,X9EK# `py{,"`%Yr8<=Gg,X9EK# `py{,"`%Yr8<=Gg,X9EK# `py{,"`%Yr8<=Gg,X9EK# `py{,"`%Yr8<=Gg,X9EK# `py{,"`%Ye<qZzC@+#AlK(8GQll"GY=qFG OQ?
za^UEr?
PHV@wZ?
[]%M/=q3-mulYp998t^bh]Z qV _^wn3XN0fGnMcTO{6{Z99z{[JIsFHx2 318sdm]he>KZt}={(F%f7q:s#:kCe[M;K!
1cw11w.
'In ]Dlw1{:J^zipYGTB#5qi*fbp]_LN EY!
edHDWX njcwtddLtnp'2t*is/= U@is#5%I]O,QS`tXXIrhJ0f5Ac)-=n69!
gv8YgRGA!
MC4'X{'llV | #C%nSS^T[no>ZJ -_Y=qFYpeDEY%yV#AzsK-88X]?
6eSPOzL><BwuC`[EDu",d7|OiMMtR-=.
kA70Fghc'D ;DS7nkk*eCkK5t;=k j 9?
e:XMKbC8Rcm5s7/@pw.
1L3<JhOf&|%p ZZj kv]9v5Fw(kokx|:_uvy?
6UzMcNWVY}I M8$6^6/n<i+=LRd6IGGBbQQ1WFEt8XHg#_gSL^f&N9tk/MV:U #xfh RV-&g!
,Lzh1vPj,lq48Gfk(3t=g}S0kQ2?
,|Gqq'6{uw@`[m;luHx1Z UQj;ua6xwv ;lTq9=0spj-133(9 c*m39=`5Mhf.
9:5auuEvd58sxSMz:Rt0u uEsCeocL_/]<](xue2OkvZj8E[.
o>ZJ -_Y=qFYpR?
za^:H(i"&w DU;=)VU1G 3(A7^>*oo:of}OSB=_ o*oN>*oo:of}O>*oo:of}OWB=f}OSB=_ o*oNB=O o*oN~*oo:oKLG?
eM|hh{_-D6ZH/p@&>a, | !
K}oR(9e":K b[6%-UZyZwXqg 88i>qa-*Ix-:VFxg<ZwSZtS4-KzhQXj8eq8*]S(w5MuZr8nlkp-djD^xV6Sa-C.
8AIz:1{dQ+Sh4QM]SEwM)LG(_Vm%@Yx8*hq}ZfS>iatkXe+i51mtSL;.
,Xq>T',{qp61i.
JIWyL#fFnI_&C+kp;1%++51b8m4qhv^~w:-&WD!
XH_e9:Esq#sLl#_[ph8}n%FFAke&&4bs'51<&bC{vM=#(<mdp?
UEWgoy|oE1LQZ%cM]CAjcl9b-G,VvZ7FU3>UMXMG$WYvlv|'[6J3UTEU|{)y*1l/}nMU7k5Lo qqaaQE9h[OWl;5xxUU*=pQpOU E,Y=qFG ]*AFY',+2@$2@$2@$2@$2@ATBuQBPrEuO?
YN%yS`@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@AB3AzH16^W fZkrY c],Mv*i_qL[|6fw;0|2e*e}NY%FfwHiz*QERp#7-u4MQxS4f1cIj_]shd 9Z4CsP4)- l$`o33fo/+b;7}F,=NnGt+*ENUUj%`%Z{j/=Hq1cI.
9m;}{M4QW "b= 5KrU+j)%,98G;n-',jMqL<&&<qfIU mYko[UmN.
Lv],F[Zhe7m#,rUi6n[Z=D~0ul/(cp@k$k^2,Y&ffyk-:j0D[lOw>Zl:tO@2ZLs1t2V%3M4DU$L_-|.
SDS5Ung6,c[q 2?
s,ML8Zs,Q-6,BQUYkQ[?
sX[;u+-S>/iiX:I_yv x*umgd`:hh'sZ8sTm{u[Mb")-*efmyn-oCxZ%^PV/dY=qF<]*A#5A(9 2k<Yg60@Vxj mY <`g60@Vxj mY <`g60@Vxj mY <`g60@Vxj mY <`g60@Vxj mY <`g60@Vxj mY <`g60@Vxj mY <`g60@8W5V?
FA;VG2Pry:)Jl-meCUi/pg+a?
Y=qFY OQCc ~'VCc ~'Vc|c ~'P619@|c ~'P619@|c ~'P619@|c ~'P619@|c ~'Vc ~'VCc ~'P619@|c ~'P619@|c ~'PWb+Olc>rOlc>rlc>rOlc>r?
(Olc>r Y|`Sc ~'P619@|d619X ~'VCc ~'Vcho p"==4ga}vNf8Eh fh fh fh fh fh fh ' XR4[wIUQdA{[=A[eY=qFwz%Tq8t?
[A@Ayn+"sTJ?
T,j2_bs/Irs/Ivlj2_bs/Ivlj2_bs/Irs/Ivlj2_bs/Irs/Ivlj2_bs/Ivlj2_bs/Irs/Ivlj2_bs/Irs/Ivlj2_bs/Ivlj2_bs/Irs/Ivlj2_bs/Ivlj2_bs/Irs/Ivlj2_bs/Irs/Ivlj2_bs/Irs/Ivlj2_bs/Ivlj2_bs/Ivlj2_bs/Irs/Ivlj2_bs/Irs/Ivlj2_bs/Irs/Ivlj2_bs/Ivlj2_bs/Irs/Ivlj2_bs/Ivlj2_bs/Irs/Ivlj2_bs/Irs/Ivlj2_bs/Ivlj2_bs/Irs/Ivlj2_bq/f[sA E,Y=qFGwQG2Pr^PV/dY=qFYpTq8t?
[A@@'$:hhhaXxXx kukuku a a a<a<a5:5:5:ZZX@0@0hhaXxXx kukuku a a a<a<a<a5:5:ZX@0@0@0hhaXxXxXx kuku a a a<a<a5:5:5:ZZX@0@0hhaXxXxA?
V@@A{[=A[eY=qF<]*@@4=h*?
*Pr|9dp# e'N!
#H,I`}?
jX;O&I`}?
jX;O&%I`}?
jX;O&II`}?
oRX;O&I`}?
jX;OS&%"<,-:zB}, E,Y=qFG OQRiM6 b8+:`ukA1 2rpBq5<eMFEbd9_o,)f.
ZkxTrHkK8s8;-2V"wnALAt}q|me+i)P:<ofpowqtV]j x$$5_06`Qe:E.
Ur#X@vN|05wgX0v.
_->=D$3'snf]$j3[, oA]SyPiL4Zuqr>F2W W?
]YLW=<EKGM[r^D% qrA.
+8HbYlU1 n^2$nYg:,Xs^][$rY)Z3<jdGe2Nc`SB :gUp nr4B@w;"7;XARpZ)!
2)n5KZO0'qA}q[wUSH<&3SuAGC%uq?
:XMU7o@z 7o@zU9GF*?
YY=qFG ]*AX8GH]S?
o90t$ ,Y)8z~F= ,!
DXnt4iW[t]BqXe<lt{;h1]J~ <-4pGe`DGbr03f@.
r*3H@+j&wj@sYKh_sMnZV]2Wj{c7dn$C[]kmY5c7T=1H<wfrQEm<X1P7klY 0 "iCn <&JFD @ :UMP[.
o*A{[=A[eY=qFwz%Tq#[u| eX9 hG+iuuI$#/-oImt3Cul!
;l5BsvYfQ,4e]+E 5Yr}06 X] 9?
e:XM{h^[%n;UWE~UyiU:[&q :WY{it#tUJa=P5 &BHo-].
}##5JR9n{T+Wsk="wGZW6MH*M^y{uKM1-Pdn&wk$1mc&JwrW2UxWz iD7kd2Ato9|ab,^+iTj jKwu}F4:BEGCr[.
27#28hA^_Yj5x?
dA[9;W8p$E`4dl~-]awss1 ;%(Y-'k v{#U$ykYmqA?
&(1;%DGVg5M3u hvNAsClK.
qEE<sS5ge4R13m$Qxe@zKWcl%S1u&ME<9vG^ Hv@;GriF :SnWT6caqkd@qU%kd|rKM4Rj,A1(0k7A0LzTsPM!
`UwF6R#T2z(Haxis!
#cAs7c+mn:HDH|pAS2+M":;D'x4MNa[q*CT,<`?
*=Y+w*xjFG64VsEUgeM6yF~ezr9'[/T)c5QH$d&XX4/j x72"+57 sAw)mX_La<2+E]:+YsgwOIpf^wfj [KU=$A;^<AWm"uULn4E$0^@`!
$9cyI0eR7f,onAAYQ>dU&wg$tRk ;xc$ kY +(l|jkWK,tH<p[N,u@@@AgDdg<F}!
d~h90IaFF3kKAFl>8Py 2?
F,d*9A AC60u^-<'sI^v[uM}6@n-oCxZ%^PV/dY=qFYpS&BnWs${7s,n9&F(Z ~De$ Q#?
Zp@# q*[H):R2AB3 h0~>^ V]&tF#uHp9lxhd`TrB 2;4P|c-p y%i16j !
K}oR(9e":KsA$p~0u#01ZQ2G7AhX:VZ3GmWbHW]+CkA<mUmzr<%1V,q1zj 2k:Ub#JpWZG(dl@<N<DE={T7Jq{'<*="&rAz9rF hhe|*^W > ZZeTnc j[OmUiCkV93[eb6z'o<^i5jU8949p!
0Wumg!
kOu4Qkf|;hHH#?
*nzJfC6xrds+:yx~mov~^ :jqAJ;okqENMa%Pj+miIZ{-I-gKX6p 23udqPb>2YZ20>81-]Z $U6K])Lod,h~Fyr#1L~j}C5rzZiA$7@9nwn<1}/hOM*J73Oe>Gpu;#1?
S;&;A4z:Ke#N5^?
b 9wR,#G8SmINxj5Zy~5Aw"iiY ]H44CJla$8{z:7#m7ZHw[FDPp VAK9uW|AVMlz[T|KF-KvRkYendEU[-%QH M|#^T.
wlKShZs[Gdxk<j?
=wEVhqmEjv`8|(0^(8O1y% 665nQl}RJ1/p{w1zC;]6eT#YS8awJ.
Z(y417!
SHs%4c7e$laZKW:(DzcFeay4faIX7<9?
h7+=&qk 3pAvlkim`dPFwt!
" j'[XqhqvWJ>F7h;wh^),ZXP-O7P<6t.
WWhRM5TnlZ&H0N9-yFjL[iBfu>Lm=i.
NYjq42Zbe[pa|0U54fF]>9y]z|X/H:"7'x>2.
~0Aq;H%~Q)]h-ul @Fc>|k9z#4Kv^ ZH d1(!
AR`8wFLEk]!
-c-F;=iFd3!
jMQ3o"TGN!
#$[1s0U%B.
#%MkjHT^`OJwH-oCxZ%^PV/dY=qF<]*@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@AQC%nSS^TcXZ+nsA.
0 gRI4xq3Ix,bUUya3.
'md%9nDNg>6vEkb~ijt00#ZWYIP4EnV%V:86JfI:mmSzOibX]S,q:6{hefB6'a'0U{Zo](4s>)0Yp:M,5w VM=|^cmyTwi;I}E;nt@9^j"OwSgO)< [BfoQGK;^da<I3;}mOSK0q|)Kl|SGqtdmasZ'P~6: Y4P#m{c.
*CltLA^Fy^u;E>59G7j)0BcwH[=H8P6j(_w24_&MoEMNX>65h-H)HKYO9?
6 s61%#4E@%A B8< 8><O,LZvuLh>4!
'o&VVI`}+6fNge->@ABZp:p H?
>I nr,~t2"kH Pfo87vB Xs`!
Tfxwa~#-lyzG^x5~HeYBbaa</^*Opxj~>]V'E)p >Zg79<cF@A`mprV[WPbl/@rQ6jnK-+#vFhT1)t:L=4fwS|s$&6<?
4DE] &)qN8b{dfm+&cUT5a{Gwsbjk iberqj0SGz=0H?
X $m4RwO6,x2)MQcQ5Uxs/nUM#dCsn*EJ+9WRf0]<W,>`JsM@Cxtt2!
k]ZDe-eV@A]>"`l'ct3{Z^v[(8GQll"GY=qFG ]*@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@AQzp"Pr-Qt+c3`r|KtXt*QS l`W&%Q3=z?
xqm5K,9j6E \x5 1SBb% &A^!
'{XX$[uTek 5$+"]bOQQ#bMS<__~%UL f&+Z `S^qrnkk52lnHTN$H-g]TgzF<OV/pg+a?
Y=qFYp|` %3w.
`V32$Ec7iCK_S7;/L>$E3zZCiCK_S7;/L>$E3zZCi>$E3zZCi>$E3zZCiCK_S7;/L>$E3zZCi$E3zX~9 2=Y.
x9 97K<g-b~*9~}oKK _r-!
|I}f~!
e:XM/$t63,iwRB]|-z|7<'L:Z1_0&tnI*F%7%[OSYLF7nmtf:e#_J4"[ u$y]-p0/yym/=OIMkAlgB3noe:vDZ%{Ui {%X:ijv^5^y/8hQ__>[wQ8!
i,I[_}>Yu0&()lf]"qHx>8cIqka.
X9WHirb;+uuu[KMFon#~_*0%-VpIM.
X'=aAAi^<G_Un<ROSOU9E.
i/c&w@4EOqY69.
zFmUVuqvGQ^Rsk92G9qJ$*zx9^K EhZfI Dqws4?
XYh}$Vcp4Cr4>iep3~vm(SWtL2@d}FiUPRTHr!
`tI=d- 9kDVa=)j$%ui`.
Mwqvy7ukQ_ ~!
lFYT*,%xK `e-2y;<V("V[no>ZJ -_Y=qF<]*@Aj/Vh;1R9_8llkh+~!
H dH d=5C)bk+Ejq{sm+Rfn ~ SUkZ_#1=YKwsF>2Q<p XE dH dH>]^ptM'90I>nQ#$,p^:ZTsA6&-Es ?
(DFEz.
15nj fWnnJqTi1}C?
,:=<0^o$>:=<0>o$W|_{{OI0^o$S|_{OI_}E?
&NO#|_{{OIO}C?
&NO%~:5<0>o$W|?
{{OISO}C?
&NO%`eUfG5N4eAO3Lcwd"empP'ID?
YY=qFYpeD99FuMd,03vQdb"AT,c8J5t{C^L+cl9w-Pf8s VZ 'Y8,s4~U*#B`@ADU S<$Au7H (UMY LA=W 9k,8JwCb"2h_2I(9?
e:XMwIhZHv,/SN"n?
GRmx=<c D.
t1Xfg<p97Vf>5[U~NG *6m,Zqk}IzG)C@$G:'GutT4Np=45]kuEt:=:"mZWCcLEnKAZX~i}kTdN7~hg;[6GI<i@nfdX=;yK#Onlqf HiQDZ;,@X4c{jj7Td2A%,215h#mn` H>Kl6(h GI--&<Z94AH ];; 5}jA{[=A[eY=qFG OQ6iXebFd^JwBi@ XdMs)S,826fwi5_twtNV#p z})seobA> 7N.
<-YrNGdO89g n0/"3mO+^i#Pb<{viRH,i'8tJ+R_xiMkSjk3e;6> O47=p(65oCbj*)+!
PfCDrgUK;C<A.
:I[ [ RAT lkx] [^K:38Mm.
QE{C X$FLBYR4bWcGjG6_,l={68[^FJIC${!
(qyfEPclljyJKAG)*l(Fh5LGLlW6*v-R3>6(4l~(TQ;^C>K^Tal3Het0Y?
okH,9$yp/'e5d:wFx~&dy9"9wujjjcXlWrXbf]*hGI3{~c6(Z459[mGv[(8'Qll"GY=qF<]*A&_.
Ec^_>zy'u:Z&8FN' PFi40]; s,7EQ.
<<knh#v{fu&fZAYAhaF3ZZ5@:2dZt^Mg[X(K).
mV:zH/PZvRaskG8j `Z 3wE`k}J.
4[{`#22:&0umQQbTFg<2C1M&hKxKvMhQ8*mM!
$end3zmq6:+Ve*%dr8zPnhAlVTIS769v,5EzXkln {_cTF+qeI[NT4;17PFQ:j?
mdD+}=Z[14yrL.
|WPltnU )`>'HV9GjQAZ?
79|,516AkT$0Kdd 0Asl]Mc+ee*yMNsc}h4b}O-,95uZ8;;NxON:nh)eKDZ6trn G i5mM H0v`;p7=-_&a4!
<c0&W:;Uv;%*%[fhdn= 3h`nMu]TWTF~<'9y;GSGxwFjkD6PSYZ No2w?
v%iCIsZ6r;Z7Islt2&07 K]?
etU38k~n==;w0QZ]W_WMRif "q;(?
,t6nLow%R^2r]?
sVSvttu=8*&v3=petqb.
*6+UY).
V]A>vE[PJH@(:+`lYp ))95o~dLrjES-`|Uw6{v/Q3v-*kTfAQ.
"QMrhn-p9 U1'>z(]M1>C#q,V)bmZbllh5 h7@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Alvwj#i(z~#Y=qFYp[nv0f:uTjl6x#mpU/dX16+emCm dnx&`{qj5}R*vMtT%3""/> 2w3TiS+UpEF JgTSYK98ts4Mt-hkT .
sKet,uU3C= ^m<TJXX9jn<tK[.
m gkr'J&1<-L)Xjjlgg,.
v98[pnV+YIOc%1k7w4w;&]m.
:q$s$J//4s#bltEY3} j?
IiAp]p{<Q6Xd9`e;l c@ h2P[nGI;Shfj(v|>s6V/d9~dYe<x#NatJd~3>94dA3BkML.
b2i*w2Llx>p2;L|^v&68]2X+D3KlO*&fDx,Ab=lWzAXY.
9s i*&b+k$.
u4{"2f3w!
hox":hl)'19n<2!
w Wk;gR28h ciKvCX8;?
s, x0>!
<5<u6$o'=P53Tnvcv<<v,U *a 43 /)CCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCD*bk/Z6- |LX7='3c>pd&x,wP}8o{<W>pd&x,(|LX7=+8o7='3`hG!
LYT;-: Us?
D2-aa{CrYs>~sBhs]=ms?
a5q,R_#wGr;C Obx,(|LYNP}8o{<;C Obg(|LX7='3c>pd&x,wP}8o{<;C Obg(|LY^P}'3c>pd&x,wP}8o{<;C Obg(|LY^P}'3c>pd&x,4,%/w0doq=A3g[mp.
L @$BjfjVR.
9R"i{191x5@|`?
+#J+}#>P=B.
%A,[TbW643@43@43@4QpU E,Y=qFYpP8o~{AAAAAAAHHHAAAAAAHHg:}9 hp~{AAAAHA+HAHHHHA)H+HAHAHHH)H+HAAkxHH?
3yu f]/R(9":K f:v.
qY(1k<f8k5DqbfHXfDeUXHe<H!
M f)P~rZh$r$10vCWxc@wK qD}rY?
_J[|k'}_,E7rt} ~7M*H>lSw'J[|k'}_I,E7rt} ~7M*H>lSw'J[|k'}_,E7rt} ~7M*H>lSw'J[|k'}e-557s&)4pDdfpV&R2 ;; 5 }jA{[=A[eY=qF<]*@@A 0#9&]sC@Y,]EY%|/v~e{,SW<d^$%U"g&Y.
I2sW<d^$%U"g&Y.
w{,SW<d^$%|/v~ew{,WW<d^$%U"g&Y.
w{,|sW=|X%PZ2@u=%mC<u <+7<0I9:wJGHb&mQNCcyrwz>y?
Ig,SW<d^$%U"g&Y.
w{,WW<dEL]N|/v~e{,;qIK^$%|/v~ew{,WW<d^$%U"g&Y.
w{,SW<d^$%|/v~ew{,WW<dEL]N|/v~e{,SW<d^$%U"g&Y.
ug~E]Y544#H|8{sN`!
d} p"Pr-Qt+ >vcacgiUY1e8@K!
KF t)3ZUu.
491579g},L-<VmW(E4e3;_#Md hNFn8Iq9.
]CbYUdU $WtF:tZ;["6cD1"s~om][Om;2%7874n8U`QxW76fX;3^i#i-CoG,/+l2&)LOsCEO$cc6j0qpAe.
z[i-/}>fFp;A pkk'qkZp#=:cwciw@5 WUEK-6i]' l q #bU]tT6iWfgd7?
z{-*9>9Z4<:@-}F6b[Gi-sw $.
kH8]XQ qd3#Fg z ,cn"a-4UyR$<>Dh(5HAaad2.
pVsA>+m28UI`HkG]kJzrcG#2&8.
<mSElyaPQ@@A_WADv{TNgTQ}8gg?
"T~41n^)}>+RbqxekgzF<OV/pg+a?
Y=qFYp[3qcA~e#&11tsy]d@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ALAT=p9T6^.
`Y>UTQ/Qw1#Q.
B52O0A7R**D<c#o* YpW"@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ALU#0Pb]QLa9"0szG%w"9+Csf MKi#2;3@bfxr<dsJEuO?
YN%yS`AZx:+%A:kKh;:OSYzNX^sJ6m)D;~>v}PGsWW0TKt?
clz_>`jt_^]e8`C=PkydO -y7"ta]MZ+;Lw'+oM|~"FF|{w{dR4riVS7BfUoiv*:_^5 gbXN:[)+4X T(}~;7Jv>`F[jTfKF +tK'WjFU9yV v41/(khihl/k"Ak%>{XUd%F14 <35}R:*j)~H@'&3>BiQY,&3Y; tL---*tdm +K[;ob0; UKCEqmS#[5K[@<h:U!
Ak3Yl6;JG9 bw3=~'TKI<V3AVSR#c'J)h3slK@q,V{yM-sX3eAb,wu1OhKk3<'> #cWs}.
46k{dtblx AAzRLr=Y,n o<A{}CQKMAW$TDy<9XfVU3{Dg"AXg`H_Xkg%Ae6.
tmCqh'AgUv[s5S+3Y+76sfhun5[<eu]Kcsqv^8s6fs@@AURCD9K7@w]8r hF{qTs*H]c|lSIC KnTD4: 9-xp p.
WZ;=;kK<6P|E#q93^&Kw4zF>#^Hk#q @Ae>S9lAy*@AGAPaG*g>fzTp$-$~Irt (CO(9E":K*E<c7bf?
,e2}oF,Mu^neHZY[iu'5.
XW~ 5sv$; r+!
~oJw;7vlHIu5Z.
7j1pb1]|L:xLk+.
eG6|m4r1o7cgUos=|Vk=mt]i%L^nu6{^R9/d KLi5v4]lcX c{-tMEr2v8o7CS?
rMuwt0G, 6:*rLq s n7;xNCK)yGH%p}~==W= M'^je[115:2HX+bi.
%J6FW,A?
wO1 M81l2$n;AV6{8Gz+~OKNsd.
z6^)mC^L0Kx^{fea;rinf;iNh^i#bU5ah$qq Pahb=1c&qK:LKDN1FmW- <{|hj] iG.
tRTAhsp#7&g4q~#q'I%w'Ytj&+G8Z-nrq#6jST( &Daab=|#Si "|Mp7DNsNYoQ[Eq9m_y0((d9mFk5MST>/V^4i(ruUn>xH%Qz";W,Y,z,a,7ISK:git:FmRDxa6[l7P^(#.
DBm{9"x#Gv+>#a`TTPIQ{:Z`Z=>{t9lMMq2kP@A`!
i|fctZ^v[(8GQll"GY=qF<]*Anf3lX1W J4YKt*X c ^=-q08{+1srlSl@5vGtj f3W;4rXaii94Y u ,8F-DUP~R) "ZSqJ%>L9VTKv|(KG'=NZA_,5-]X-* ~H#vGAY;01aTI+_YZ2,v{ntm;vUAWE&WC+s2Q{A_bu2-VV:j6]LpA$4UM<f983xNktCH$4 ffBE]`%i*y [F3Y,Oj[]|5lt2*7)*,&]?
qOAz*1#o*6?
:77gn]wp*Q*q)1aK9|RDCQ)!
lRbQ^xf +"-{2NJ3 >u_ jcYU(PC8A8&X/2Vls%M<QKN29cnGs<.
#1aN</`:xf|AAzZ*W{.
:=VM1RP6TKAseNH:hHx _p,CvK(>ysWpq~T|TXdZ-bFN`G)V$h ZT$f h1=dyq#X7Du0uU-tdpSk87<9 o}:=`omW1UHY#O%c]$nvD5vl7oywL6k_.
47"Tf]Jw2$p#0gb}(bElju*dsCA!
Gmo9cD7*|CVj.
SGh9Shy$*y6+xsO `!
t"VT1.
4tT2>@H0o:P(p,!
I $254tqU7ovh7NVhGx'aUz P(Z'`Fdo9u :pZ@ 69719`u]N(oSN5p[,4<&27; i'BZ%DI}1bPjsI 8+5,;TO().
^lWbk3T S@3VwS2I9.
97,$Oo/Pt/+e-U,#N5]6&%v8Gf,EyXHAme Z}[UW?
SoX8m4RW/Qe(9?
e:XM%y-W,g%n^uS6Qeor#Y?
Z;f]O1F1e*(<[GFuw]&5+IGQw=-bG?
zU4ha~u7|5*lr&&]m -8==S3pbq^mf.
7F<b,QhADgYq=UWcj)/q`,RFM#zQ,BOp%B^c8<`Cdb%H dqAT!
0E[&&AtjkFuKy(.
Xsp%EACYu vC+)8 dzA[]dcHg6zH`TPPA]rK.
1st:b98M6 ~VT@@#1z@7[ZD@YSebfN#vJJr^(U6&$ULG&k6J#FNZs1#J:MAwkk15FJ`11I.
z3:6c5$[6<kGs|Lpkk;?
Zm$PIpk"sO'gHRq{tu*--ObH{8dnalQ^{2lM))ib0opOI<*qM+U=4QbQK[k9;5sv|h[ULKMD$y{}9oR!
V5@Az!
rb]e)VIHz*BsUX2zAl~vwj#i(z~#Y=qFYp[ykO,Oez ?
_/)*%(`HwE;9f _<9Aq3vopGdq m;RP#RhWN0&2 $ 3+nwKMLi.
VAO#nf~ah}c5RRGZUM9aHoFZ9'Jf,Y8LTX8] np W~:G,Lhhng!
, [Kp>(e^W+?
Y3 (5RvR;E8S`!
wl);u[x# ';AyCYmA/Bqcm Xfehs, gX p6"RFdui?
aIV=l,S7nSLS{XIdU[cb6Vl"UxC&%Sy:>TXR: X~w8MLZb8:s#@j% tz2Gg;*G%+QP^)vi=M 8vBM~Dj6<K*V6/ h##<rje9 pDV6pWt&lj*N{`7fk FX&iLul3PR_VHuwwGKKZn{5t!
)f6Cc.
(:Dm`p>6PMCVyt|!
WW4=UNk7(=03vATz2Dz4xf|[I?
heSG|vF<CoT[]%dVQIFG2&Ak5VmU%Etq$w3cg,A8Gp& S[ V2$q0# hr)!
N9atOe1-sKa` x#MWt4zkq~"3W1:,XEX=i^3cAk6PR=kK:l~W]G IQ@#dtmvys098IHYui3kZb}|f<8o4?
[<TvE)kO9l]h2NXke t} *Tm4S^QfBM:E;Uqn6ne6Cb > L,8:'lRYICN gCZ3UvE.
G*"ATElis"%Qmyl&v}Mj-c2k@ <WYXdA^YE+p `S DFF*z1Y.
=VrEuO?
YN%ySaZR+$a{c8KDFK%U|TsWcFTeCMoe|9I@d 3F&#r^4Ghx4eO{rUtL ^zBgEtYu@5BOlYU2e`%>_iE6o bSo'[LjpU,c7,8xDL=dtn>lUKl>I%sjXqMvexIvwY[X0snd2AvxC-R+*br9xBX'$(+ :Fy6KCp$4}<2AwAb }kQH93f 3qZq9 v|h(^,Km-M5A]anG,T'$4@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ak=S2R p<G-tU`QOm<trF.
#rqf, AV4kA.
q $y'($_D|kz8D$y7<u]rE]T[no>ZJ -_Y=qFwz%pL`i#^u'8m3tW%&#4%+Po WvH)7wz}>P|zkI!
GPbUR*aS3yJ*k83- U|4,5x[(>vcw>](>PP1@ CxJSU5PsSS.
A4P} |iG-s ALU ' 7e]qX%4">W3!
%3itQAG)*l:KwNam |*1L0xuU0O]9s^C3TA71&b#m{ n(9up9WO9,ciO?
u0UtV<7l&4ULZu^;Us+@xlYa}4 T^es"[~xE`1{6IzK6qM]swx~u: S:b|f#wO?
9bxd)kDowg.
t'4DCy30LEkoae{F 0"F]q&8b;AmSSj%cstdKU=,ksaZY$R;P:A[,e4con&s}vVj|[Q<Z6ck}Puf#-ZM[5][-:(?
pq^:DJ9-y05eW.
J+-^ N!
h&#4l^nJj84&&e9A^uYQQAwG[P$Sn vXc&/S: u"ceU.
bcV{)(M!
Esn xpAoT'mEIR$Zyr' 2u T 6MkG8=}`s$i{kuV*.
p PMOKB<"x=RSWFUCyx-en#:k_1{qu`[Qi]Acg|bCVTpM!
|KxC/a"Ltzy`4,?
IW/,[%p3>M!
|Kg nB$GH_Dr[%p3~M!
|Kg/`"LtzyaOH_Dr[%p3>M!
|Kg nB$G's&5TG|4J=yjh@L,u.
,6iq8tQ$nrBxVUQpU E,Y=qFGwQK|w8IG_ s5~}#z&9"g(NH18 VUUrJjv#o7OJElskDzqhi" ] 'wjEV&S$l9ur/@@@ATIu %Io$bhkF@nL1,G&nsXg4[TbW6/h{H#0FH#kOKIr.
GE+MMQ{O:":_4oh!
A)/h,GRX]:mN:LA08ijpi&snA,TSTU<WLeq].
$rF[(sjqE[SaCMha9b711,2H1=eUEK4i1nk>qA?
-gZelJZa1d:E~#uLBkl!
`-jKAiDtXdRTc,L~;2(>/0U|SZ6ESE1`17fd&|9UaXZt/DnAIIp`.
,uakgBh&:HYI2AG)rSMyAf# { R jFg{ske'xa- -z#u32D{&Y^nzEF{;(dlacr3~Cv0q%wUVHZ9 h -ddA:bQUw8IMK,Py}rJnbsspXP]FNij2FTB]/805YYkQ<cl9g2AD7%O]q;U2@$2@$2@$2@$2ATgzF<OV/pg+a?
Y=qFYppec)<fPaT:9@x7,9g4;s0{NLX93Ic?
%4;s{NLX93Ic?
#%4;s0{NLX93Ic?
S4;s0{NLX93Ic?
#%4;s{NLX93Ic?
LY}=M^|fd0FPGhx-p AoRSYxZ W2I$)f`rf|.
~FiK=&i,w`rf|.
~BiK=&i,w rf|.
~FiK=rf|.
~BiK=&i,w`8[h!
SOokA[YAG) l8uQ`QdiiTj6IG5f@<vMQyEdtQ#v`n^z6d~m#|UKY(JiGH,i Q:C,[X;qF,V8b=*:"RtQ*=q+k-x |aUbMthsD[W4TTIy99``Sb,~B5@FEP[no>ZJ -_Y=qF<]*@@@A4zP~<,9e7K-Ip^?
%Syxro/[M)~9e7K-Ip^?
%yxro/[M)~9m7KsLiqTd_q/aro/Zyxro/[Mi~9e7K-Ip^?
%yxro/[Mi~9e7Kro/`^?
%yxro/[Mi~9e7K,Ixlpp5$$4fNCA.
ib%9m?
gaQ[O;8K YnSS^Tqbdck =f]Sz%{y1wK-<y!
na3D[Nho;bgNMuv0$8Qc0iO?
7r}f^_o!
m1d,6;I :Zx[q05,*w[(8GQll"GY=qFG OQQ;)_#fM[GI"&{Qa(zCrI LE'oRezi<z,;I`O Ry&X.
w72sAI LE'oRez)<z,;I`O Ry&X.
w72s4AI L]Cgp0=;w(ot5]4x$8sCp5@Ae+Ave4f?
xXElXFwYn]qE'OC~ YRy&X.
w72sAI LM'oRez)<z,;I`O y&X.
w72sAI LE'oRez)<z,qRaXKO4Auj:vocTCN[P?
BxQPf,F}z)q q$Ao bn8owG)sZgq?
7<h LE'oRezi&X.
B,[TbW6P2d-oCxZ%^PV/dY=qFYpeD$4yqt-|`O _%U@@@@@@@@@@@@@@AmO.
)dsdAXc7s06.
#frkFe&l?
[EeHWxSOY2U)h*OT}PFN}!
%At#&ho8UU(~pp pgH~$Fa0 _h V_S*(?
{{fK84Uip?
oZ Dp8dVEv[k{(8gU -_Y=qF<]*Al96B{bsQac#`4nW/du>kb<f:}]nZ'~:$0Tc!
Lg^(8:MFm7K*D mRGg6P?
(5I]4Z8Z?
gKQUQL!
Yh^7SmWAUvC6 rFm{uG>h1;@=w~RlfxdnLy"AJ"(UPp} q)fSKsa=5 =+1B+sa7 ^L]p?
h}ES2F`C ETp`} wT <cpoI&7`-q#?
AM<c:KX(=srhv6k$M-O4=K]1O&3g ?
uai}ammTj*8di728is}@z3FJpy1fnowDGnvZ,ypUEufILhvy72A;6< i4JMA}xZ<AMxw?
zUjCTtBEwW:vUDX;y$j^PZ?
W~=UCi!
g<4g 13ebkn+Ryssn`41di*F f<i,IW7'I<V,.
vZnKI?
l]YLZIuAYpttI3~63;{0t],FZ:ZAQ3sXoi uu4vnKCUKLXkhw{ TcIcPjjrxk%ip#ei2| RrfgKoSdu l |Qo:6MGR(@7H&du l <Qo@@3H&du l |Qo:6MGR(@7H&du l zR(@7H&du l |Qo:6MGR(@7H& <Qo@@7H&du l |Qo:6MGR(@7H&dg:6MGR(@7H&du l |Qo:6MGR(@3H& <Qo:6MGR(@7H+oB-V5 sCxZ%^PV/dY=qFYpp'3rXxW bD3:oR(5'SU3guvh:,ilj*T[[5RmDi,AU iW Y0nnREWc;(+XfUfef`#>8YtU|TMK|u,q>;b#Kw[du& H, Nq`W`<^^s63Az==rv[=[}RSOMYm!
H%g]| _kJuL7<bWT`tG9p#wG:!
Fvc,M'8Vz**trWDEVh#7Zc5F6rnS[vBoPpAz7 [.
ZovC<];uXrAbvsa;sr~[_<mtT;j,g1Pf8,T{b#KNhme{ i=L'("DzDtypN4#m.
NQdo;@m4-*M,pk^&{f/"%XFy8WLGi6-5zk$d46+><|e|avxacDC}gzzw_Xi1$< F+0?
H$JZ0emJyd0E2kjzrI4Vkxjcs&;@o.
zOJL9 +=Q`k?
rA=I9=d >ptM1kjO_%[uF26Lf7yr*,sExD*-6d IirlE6fYht4E,R:"upB s|-P[EhCjr/'umklGPZD`9<"JB 8C2XqK=FC5; s+NU4i16+=6j1MmIRU*ile.
c<>KuPZ-?
+]z {lmEq}m[LR2<(s7t5i]l(U7ABu}O]?
HLLgl P`K1D= osvtm$Jet(];49dtwC,fFTKJ8.
lp4|;}FL9o|w5:Q4 k&jQiem;"I2JQH!
{NUI/e`r-Qt+ f?
Bh*uk:GZhuk:GZhuk:GZhukf-oCxZ%^PV/dY=qFG ]*Ak'!
w36@#Zvwl u;;^el^+4b kCO)9;M_$'q%%DX;G8J{{zgZ%9F iJoPA=-t,/vP5slW[4UI*9@m5)G13(;'hsB6Mhi`6}bChq{OO# pkfi;2Ar#DFwdH+NkcIA A V>FgNG9I fAO|8v;k21<<5rhSUNQ=)>2mht3s,bl3ia8 ECX45hpa89(~CH+C0Bu(2cw2ETUt.
7b*RAeuCY pw#'2so@r.
} gSIs)lx1Zr#qA}w<7ttL~&'H%Nd.
'u#9(k$t.
ja1S>'=vW> 9)5_p,mlC=>*B5g!
AbtN =a>o{Ahgqlg`h-ujcPp9}Fb,!
KmlNasA8I]K~+go1cdgcS1i #v&NCik2u6SI6&FAdNwLNKr<!
WcZ:S]L kNNhB qpG#c}LNvyyK16BsE.
&sH$9T#=$)e+ PZ-?
+]QF6C-$d1_O,TK<gk<!
pP0iN#5<rIU,2v}cqIY!
]-bMv:<Mlk;hk i}GUtGfZ!
n<xWte]-Jh6#F"(2loqhEV4{-Cpz&5"r:G(7Q:[-KXh9~dI/%`r-Qt+]CbY-4-/Ylqy.
smwPtyXOm5pz#uf`HxU c9g.
tG(MIa_uL,dU9qdmTJcjO-l4VQ7I=>I[ GP=Ds&>h*8.
7Z^ yP9 _/5E5] j*%lQ0.
{hG,3-u.
08LfZH2@ ' 8l91 WW}ETshszIA$Le$XqOm%d39q1Xznu]m dAg4uv&&8Wn:)nsXvvh>S?
J (* .
n,:&Yptey] 7-eYMkb^1@Jm-<,x0yoR0j{/H|,HaXHaLtH|tH|tH|HaYHaXHaLtH|HaLtH|HaLtH|HtwIc|1OOkf&)8pm5G[iajS[n1}@@fucy93MTYEzNsn*v[(8GQll"GY=qFG ]*A,bf9Ad-g}!
IsXT%+Q$2ATpnT&?
X(9@@@AB@1Vg?
S3yIAQ9X.
=W2#VS7bWu6PS$2@PS$2@Pp(]M#ypPsX/U4Q~0#1 qszUuOS0 &EnmCrco%r* H1Z?
LRrEuO?
YN%yS`A`bKV ,W0xp/tv}JELZ s;6gLkJ%ND .
Kp_u9 8'<pk+F?
Tl_s+q)Iu=L|{3y!
)w9CX;p;S(d= ixV`03H iWBq4!
e<|5:3&Y38KX1})a^Owx; }Oz/.
j+Ifr3a>"ckN.
3YOZ<4c%|rnAXJKG }3mMwqH]Mc}mOY"b JLWFbtl&e.
wL39a/H+f S_`S971?
wx ;}i n|_n[Fy cIk?
"J X(JkLoE<-$zH:qiSJ4xmAtWUYU5&1O.
-;wnaO/-[jjJ(C@#T--a#Az*|5^2Rt tj8stm%*m.
VU Niu8nt;i.
zLDNm|kp<ZFA+U6p/qy&!
;:Nh38kzsARi&HOS=[%h:!
d7]EOtmYJwA}<A>TV@ke2/U:ZQM5 k'Rgruzr=h902v|TR:6vH#c<~07N)J""7Fe72w6M%MD.
mLmFz'vg?
c&1dc5X<Q]m:[+(OWLkA4L97| /WYnZch}Htf33(:HJY,lLQ7}H;gi:.
")*KuTqrA(:GNOqqr9Z>Bs5wqZez],8{$$f~F:uObF=c$(9P[X)&82IN{#{!
-B(df3pq ygUUZIo tKfw<<OKN<q)cfOShUMQpU E,Y=qFYpqjiDk$aA&O|4fN ^oQY 9@,xv}5e~d5J@(Xtk a:P5J@(Xtk a:P5J kUsn4z35Y,]CN~{smc>p)^'92CXS_Xj`j}NTlY|d5Jk a:P5J@(Xtk a:P5J@(Xtk a:P5J@(?
)*#fIbQ}3E@6Is]3gMK{_+=2HIT,#p2?
* zG+AV/Xt@()<1j?
_LRrEuO?
YN%ySaM+acyPy'Ua*:%}4qV44#>O@'FD}"p#".
Rag*M~3TvmjbTw:]ch Dtt+#kUWs!
XmuuQ)^Zu3f0wwwrt Ws9]u/l(s@-<)!
SEM|Q%D#CG%kA]:&vQp tH;hKz suTG:t[lQ(pcQlvjkx;Kn `FqkR>xA= E*rp Ym8HGPKo|l/dFd`eLvKTRVL%/f7~f,XC NSI|I,h:"A<2AwZi,>|W)r5-v&w[#}v-99jrk[#'sjtVLyN.
<q3w)0FYY:0AX^46z4FwK#M;M]H%jehOmu# YNcpfr,nI(9eGwbhXpq80:$Jx7tF&gqtfJSeP0PX-f>lrg{O*/pvjoVQpqTCY@ .
P~Z+jtr>'P#0"wiXsZ7jwqEEc}h#3"G5 -;,AVQVV)+.
P~:dw{.
PKVO#<G#iw$OIOZ5B59w1yn<201h*Z2is Sn8R)$v# jIX0p ]4.
9fz'$'c*'k*veeg-88MW.
V5T@A2fEFOqv`8ZXfqU^Xc]UmO=Tnl@'QkSTDYxb})U[,Zv,m>$jq4}{Q^(.
/7c:s8%CtX/HpA%a,SSgnD%~Q/|/VRLghF=sv+g5zX*jH cC|C0zVs+[asV2aZBk} $b)&y-`j0xi&CA'/P5*Pv61$_jhvv$GT^vIZnQpOU E,Y=qF<]*@@ABfxZ{TX'XyZ_Aj jeWZ_|>1NAj je{%4V_WyZ_|>6j jeSyZ|>1^Aj jeZ_|>1NAj je{%Aj je;)<>V_SyZ|>6<>V_SyJy|>6h)bnFn+6aY/4i3AuR9*9Y|w+SSS/Tw+SSS/y?
2|b+SKS/w+SKS/y?
2|lw+SKS/+SKS/)h|O/L +SKS/w+SSS/y?
2|l)x|O/Ly<_mThW?
]g(YaT)mk368b*G2w+SKS/5O7%F1xqRnSS^TkuVWV,?
#G5I|9q$FA5o{+_)IyDHf8^jtzn[;hvY-Zmk{4Uh~_GFE<0D*Am6WI-t:?
hu/YWeo1p>?
*^{4K4Ql9/PVbRaB3AjF}3$(>PWtp6sLiAm|Qq|6N WuJsl 96+u21&AM`yv@g8rbt[9#2EfwQApTx{CAPX-'54Z:i$ 4q5-G+,?
syz3AK}jlFXq.
2yK*0pNMQ-s=h:=v WWm*g-4q[Z#v`0s.
),BA=,61[5QWIGbd`<CF`,` >%}A9l 9cq)lWuR=#ND8"6pk@PA ,TXo LrxZp5A ej)S&oDE)8iXpAHmtm3UkzE@jH'0z[2$o$mMMvHAZTKkk u1#"c9(2, p}O)s^F+ese MG+i|y8dr<pAwJs}#?
"jjvJ|fXd1uWl.
V+}Edy@!
5o1LO6_rPq{2fx4oJ;k n`oSyF"KCBS~S$.
o9d=y,MLj|=n7zy`ul5|V*&jjfe1Rz&S -pcn5&mE>t16$M<g{e)"l:]KlF!
:9/rWjU4YO]<3KZ(ws]7KFud-?
FOZi(#|EI fct3{Z^v[(8GQll"GY=qFG ]*@@AOS0Gg'+^i_i 75JOojk6m WZ}{S^Ai_iMy 75JOojk6xm+-> WZ}{S^Ai_iMy ojk6xm+-> WZxmk-wojk6;ojk|:9TBc1+&hs:AYz2<7>>3^i_iMy 75JOojk6xm+->{S^Ai_iMy 75JOm+-> WZ}{S^Ai_iMy5JOojk6xm+-> WZ}{S^Ak_k{S^BZOojkSk_k{S^BZOojkSk_k{S^Ak_iMy 75JOojkXm8r2dsJEuO?
YN%y*l4?
H u^(qaDW EZ%8mO'^>Cqx]VZy7cldlDbq"Y(MCeda56#rl43&R+<iS6MbzKyp y]l:>L8ADbcN00)).
84P~rJq%9Y+Z89fA APS$@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A}&RMM1U.
Ge-9]m,W s@$f]*:Ku]|RRgqgd9-#qkAk9YE nMN:7<8 JXY8NY-j*mDl#VV#LzF"UST6XbKHJ(Pj6d b]g]+BsvRWu.
+>CxdrXSTo U$UHA:7sTjY`AT7b^r[s^0inMy*q&$L-g]TgzF<OV/pg+a?
Y=qFG OQ{it:JQYb;I)o9E sC ?
Wd&j#w.
e+B8WB$rA B^gkxk;X:+,Pm)p,2SaTAeRPr-Qt+Sa]nZNgJ$E34(TYe``G*--7wUVAKQJL_d-s1&*=&4~O[uJ|A[&agu.
PT5DdmQ-mmYidFfySg"fTlX7J OX'hW4e;c f=(WROTk)j/X Y]GIUKp|b^z(87XnK|^9sV=1#ec.
*{)l6Hit6q ;NVXWVfn T;<=bZiU^MT5WeXr6}; a!
oP*k$&C?
)Ps)cQ~I#tna.
9: i"p6h:N9f1aM%*J(%K~D ;2(/It6)CMMd~_jt;^;U-q3-p"8.
87J-TtsTBcl&|@[[$U2jyY$o<e*$E%u1l GA[4wg8k tZ 7 n@r 7 ]ftm sa}-3Cp*f4a,+A-tB8`hYTQE,& ;; 5 }jA{[=A[eY=qF<]*Ah+4f9Z#OQi'3PS,Jl(NH>CA j;iO91?
&{+W&:ZNYRiu_UCi"W9'.
aXYM4FYFsH}|r) 9 PPA8t(*]dzV4]'([TbW6-5Pixpj<sEW-qt]99 CbYh'cSeFiCh*)'.
}[,=WEEcp{7;XSG[;]1S.
SQH3[RqNkZf=3:frS6AaUbo}MUt(cq :/[:Z!
c FA}e3|=>4][1.
>tUHi`v`kXjwUnjZr<@wA:j/z;N2^b|f:;J/Pc6n<(2KQ)2PZ AwFy 1/ws]5z,Q[|n|o$#j9^OsPWU@PwDGd/GSZ1i|F)2"~aJ+jy9:p2Pgw,Ei% M){2wZ $.
`=GHi`{mvS9` v #X>GA6@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A6@Z 2)DyY^ W0j>c&UGOG{S*y:=< 3>MONO/9v?
jeY'Gt5?
S<^s}NO/9v?
jeX'Gt5?
y:=< g<>5?
gz=< g<>MOYi LK $~W8|1Lu;2 xlPZ@?
td@Alvwj#i(z~#Y=qFYp[.
IfkzZebFf7nW Yhsl3^hnIOPLq<#c8hgF}/M/j,BYPLQ[rvA$7=I[p7clBI<,OQ)v6cq{OM+Z8eNGvh:JB555UPQ1: HiqApci-j s sxDgH,MMWC-iD9G,ALb:zj+bu c_<{Q8ZXp eF LK Hg56VIO-#Z &hk^I,t'e|Pb2c$T42ZFHs#[4(ahDilx k_S=MQut1'X ey`|ua=x;A9 :K[m6rKs s7~|w)kW4[;Z)Cf@eA?
&`nqmA,$sVam #Ir:T>n3Vf,<Sk2X-2>S YYhG0_z,32 U@(5#wHE" 6,1 8:F%n!
a^dmm-tw=/s*ad+": 83_157TB'%p1q>>H:O0F#mv)ik!
0p`k{j yML%lN7p["fp=~HkNp^ %29qv4m{NyePUES-</dys$s;;L?
8MVokd F{sF}0" 675M U1=fd.
:<ZhymmQS>%Uyew>H8Dq?
4UWK)klvAPvDd#H!
^kbv7*WE> ?
bja j*(j##n b]R&* A$5=0O0ApWvfSw}8kiij*La[g14Gh`lEDtZ4G>p9Lk<|rz5e]"dtQ>bF{A'W@pNlJY),.
6P,{Ht;pIscW066vYydlj{ OsKIVwD{[|}t>(!
n{9BxsLv;qsPl>Yh:+2UY 5fhp.
zKxfcsife7(TbW64gS!
wqxJ%vfKMS'2F>7k90GoQ6|spyOcf;ikr4[lDN81a5:e{9](c:7XFfjDn}92G]AH)?
KPs _jsAP-oCxZ%^PV/dY=qFGwQT.
<)c^I4=F$ G,t4`uZ2+};/uzS@nzCgq6?
WTT <uo9%;cl.
yHjek$ 4u[.
#mH6-$'PCG.
mDbx^I-v@dHa6Y/u>7GHA:p</%%3jplH:^,<AQp:kZ#yWo(6/Wx-]]3_O$t{}/wd,CeGVzlw-j#Xc~r {WfZJ5ifj:A8br:d@AH2^fT1[$oBU~x Akx|&ii|/,g,5EQm+|[,OR&{#-]MWsb<cXWDxr+9jr9)|nPl8uDtGsYq n5dnAq<8Vb.
Uea;<WbL~<Nf(jwb {A'Pa8>3JVj[d<uBPhtAvZ=u ,S/RV2l uw@d|yjo4iqmGsWK__s:z5ue.
nDQ6%aZ[]MgMGc'sW2vMy9fz-6ez f2QzN sy-NL=]d7^^F9N^w+=mgAIsA/9"wsIwhciZo^:KrqOM)=W7x$47[[> X*s5Ri%PU[n|}> 8Oa4lk$csciI2F%~1QlV5)jrh'<Ds :16q[1=P[{+ZK#6f3A;UW:T2T@hHXq$d#S =IV(dCN f_t0Vl;];6,#]y -4hsI%eu%R@k-#=3KVU=1[xGZcm}3I(n@.
Xd+cY%*s9!
7vn>4%Vyfwg3[N5v1-;h&!
A%N,auH;sAS nrk>8#Q8nBBT8b`c 9r}BIgJ*k]ET+!
]j&%"$zV86 H>LQYh:bdK=/*W&1>(q 1+W-`%;ts:gWp2uZ n|T,:2E ?
_LuQAG)*l(Z!
=1/r%qDP5c),Udg?
Jz*h|b7Y STlD$a$`AACQp@vaXF7*u=AO(kr@*Qs<by&9,:,x+-GL)73+[,gui<00dYRh-oCxZ%^PV/dY=qFwz%[pHu35p3a_tAcxj65U 6ZyFy9:?
UmC<:'Gb7hcbk%-7k:[ cG#d4O0d9AAS-3)$8#V[]*!
ltqm+WqG0]~E7|EM^iiyFn83xuN#,OqgYxda|EeTu6c%@5sHhn[$?
F8[m*;},cdbBFY xp4}nQi I#"Pr6*x^rJhph9G=;jECM5<-k"&F k@@Aq@Aho}3'dRv5WzMb+8uDtGs|>65^Fa 5Jdc`q?
-L`2 |C9"sdh,9XY=%C*f]tAb+ivM u@Zy A]jx114d7uApje9es<ArD>[ &#M92DzpA4E5](h)2Z[&maZ>+%ct&-^#>9_S7WNT}u HY1YnP/Vp02zX~LKs<Ap%njevUQH2k8 n*uov&[#)*L6QFmP_k($C#Kck;goOxRG!
|N|CaKm%G%$b( p;h[Uq3O,q9H.
q-Og0Dm j67Q c@n_"hakV^SMfI7'Azmj8!
nsI9sgtZ$Xxn=P1N=us'~yg;ivIIdnyku>`pn}(&Lus< fw4oI1 AEonq{u$[oATx4%2V6'7xo/ua!
Ax*3[_Tkeyo4h1Z?
YN%yS`@@AO';,;wvm4na+]N5T8>B>P8Oi"GheeTP[.
o>ZJ -_Y=qFY OQpY]~M2< BH50AlMk2 >~Jy$XZ_q4eIT, -AH;<'/ZZsxW"@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@AL2ATdc3-=PQ+G/rJPw~,Jfhfhfhfhfhfhfhfhfhfhfhfhfhfhfhfhf ;; 5 }jA{[=A[eY=qF<]*@AG4<f |p9H6y2)z#N/QJKr~)ROIM_Sy,OIM_Sy%$E7YO$E7Y_$E7XOIM_Sy%$E7XOIM_Sy%$E7XOIM_Sy%$E7YO$E7Y_$E7XOIM_Sy%OIM_Sy%OKM_Sy%OIM_Sy%Nor,zOor,|'&/)HzOor,j^h/MzD|<z'z+[ w)${ejk@6@>kIqY`@AG4<F`vAD~oRsc=/7MzDc='7MzD>x{GIe~x{GIc='7MzDS='7MzDW='7MzD>x{GIe>x{GIe~x{GIe>x{GIe~Rx{GIc='7MzDS='7MzD>x{GKW='7MzDc='7MzDS='7MzD>x{GIe~x{GIc='7MzDS='="X <Io#%)="K+="K <Io#$ <Io#$ <Io#$="K <Io#$ <Io#$ yvAg;qh]Y3q9(WKFzP~,:,,:,,:-!
KljKljKljKljKe,*,:,:,*,:,:,*,:,:,*,:,=lKHljR-!
KljKljKljKljKe,*,:,:,*,:,=JVE~Aokwkem)Ui/pg+a?
Y=qFG ]*@@@@A]o|~tg/?
OIp_:t?
:p_:3K3p_:~t?
:3p_: n n@ g~ g/sp_:tS?
|p_:3tEg/?
Otg~g(J~g%_:9 oE,[TbW63@@@4gzF<OV/pg+a?
Y=qFYpPeUMX(Er=u(rvu;/31}]^K?
Nw_b cL'o)~14]^K?
N1u;/31}'isR|c?
Lbxf/;|d.
xf/'is2c?
LdS2e?
Nxf/'isRc?
icL'isRc?
LdS2c?
Lu8cGdfY#Q=B)[LiWpc7qEnT7I,3%K_AK'o)~14'iu{/31}.
xf/'isRc?
Lbxf/;|_A2vWRc?
i]N_A2vWRc?
L'o~1&N1u{/31~;|d.
w_gb ]^K?
N1u;/31}.
3[b`LY).
4RN9fMYH!
'7s} DrA<4Gq%6W#lQ< KLpN%g'kWRc?
k9;|Odqh[yE0[TbW6.
{X3qzV-qja$kZ=d9,4tv Sm)8Lqb"A$M~ PP3@P~rJd3$ I|'- uczvA|qD[G1j?
cY&~I>my7rty%_[G1j?
cM&~ISZw'IU{4i>my7rty${4i~]y7rty%O[G1?
cM&~I>my7rty%_[G1?
cM&~ISZw'IU{4i>my7rty%{*(qd94H bhJzjvE {9}D(/~v[(8'Qll"GY=qF<]*@A^es3"39}b#05cCZWP2@@@@@@@@@AMU$echp 13?
~FO7tSTeJsAG=<HP[a<'IiH?
7Cgx@@@@AgZWI<CBT5VFx~CeY2 jjq30sVi2rV i?
_2I(9?
e:XM 1b` <]l;l:R$q{3ZfV^T|2} h)#NtMq8x_Pb<u_;hba*:<Ip1#:wgel '38E-vxk,*i'f-9=wC#h"R$eTas2T~ " %yc%;X3Z s[qqVm5h/%&!
(@:[;$18d-BskJ@/= O#-&ZUnhh)6m.
n|-, 5N6-Qy,D5_wkowOuufkvH.
*)el=FA6/FH6CM!
KVXIX@KJ WwJyN0$y 1jp+d`[3NCZYoA^kD_iC%M?
( ek ,g9}c_V]jIY4L2I6-bCs;u{UjK/vLe(dGOetkOHzsASd6X5t3 ]nvJik+c!
yP`tZuX"qA,<F 44PWXth):Pbt A]nRRRl~tY*+j4 /W5hI<M=LuQG4O90A(?
m`PW4F_}VC2 -!
Z<^PZ7KMvOLI,95hVb.
UeQM:]SQK-F&qteg4Yi7swX}kzJ(kzJ(zJ(kzJ((wv{L|gTlR<3Fp#~jSuX0-TklHfn8ns91gf2empP'ID?
YY=qFYpeDy`sAbFICH("2ObKm~!
S[iA-LrfPu;XIPAQ7.
j{4iH0sw2}IQ5yl.
s|0lldQtT,:v;s+!
TuO3@@'.
C[=}7]hktn"AAK#+=GS~dq`(;U q J5RNqpcKNGx!
,t}MA|ABrACQCuxxnF2 xxPb3;<3XFm=G/QhN@AV{%FVh%XP(0?
l3EJx*#Xe#ZIn@*iL]WPDx/#32zd<=hs`Afr(e[jV<"bCH2UMQm6Z_Syqf]XdAe}9 16Fdh71A Z#&9=gOZ&Cr>>[Y 9F}`F^C%z* (_2I(9?
e:XM11Ew?
_B<MeQ q.
rH-GC3eg+V$3kS5csdugoUuDr<5m-kN3NYl2]]+sh]q?
1Q](PFhd;^a =G x#N:uj-U0( dNy+>H4[98Tqo^]11e]ZMEtS6Y(8YXHzG-*;m,UFsnk9C~K]8VmH5 u3WG8hot.
~KqSK|IGG'sYlZP{!
)GA8SLswO1]KcbMg& <H1s0MMt$UJK9a3s@!
=uip:hs.
M7uAVSc{'r,X~Pn1*$79j>AtWsfnf0E3jHJkAx&:TmMF34nlm[Qb-dww_a[<urb#tvj9-UDA.
qA%1[pAv+3 <;}sRT6F6A+uI:~joX/mlHd_j%%[Q`eRK~U{t[)-V:lDd-'EGM=93$d%4%/W5m{5/-`"K5xd44vG%74T #agN8 h-U^LwYc+i;gYy1w| w;2tM5k1.
c[SV5}8rO][ApV<yuZ:2MI/Q]W]i,qI;r CvXl*C#clLksZ v$9Yt5M+DZ5XKc]nf_SLr9XbFE.
z:w, :i=+5l8^v`i3v O%]#2<uRxMG%N<Owhd6;cy*D'GteLs.
~"lUjby4MB dz2=(6OIbf4Ry dNAU^Y4vAl~vwj#i(z~#Y=qFG ]*Aon;uPaa!
6ZV<Jk!
l@pk%R6hG:_-5VltTRkNa.
p$48b,chKS{]=+0|b{j)`J0jNN;S[{l3t-V|jP9}:9f:AwmbKn4GrL'ACL"{2curd4Vqt2*l5-0 p vcvyp wiL?
dRlu53HZ2<'BUt CkQWJcu}9"t6 @dDa(3;(LuU[X<:Y(9dwPc8ZL6#RTs`6u1.
-:a~~!
6GaFssc}Z^a[qYi v%-+Z}L9|%=)`"PhI*vK"t5H{uk?
qVnu&,51kNk5ln(.
smZAzqdZnl=|A2cr9 W;ij5xvVZhipXg%Vdsr|{wU2)Knk#SSz=Df7*hG#0Pk l$z2^#mp;^OSO$DdwURj&q*g+XepV$^mh85 x1+NA.
tt~8nCQS33Pe_Ay,}kF:svkW$}(!
=NjN# 6mk6G.
TP@q6:DaNKuVj k s;< xn3f-X?
Ls`aUOuL-ay9at&6+pdeT8r}?
&;W##jn']MOPb|FV5aNp>>3LK[=JQMWqkDZ`^Cbm|^nIO}-)5a!
FXs>Tf_le}0?
U^cDjEs%PHLw?
G(*7 &5v7>Z}}]HFi)TY*W,Xsp0Zu'xUGY:2 i?
e:XM^"n5>B %F]*i6jQAw|Cumi;*Kg`xUVA{IFgu+.
#84mZck8kf[M]_WB( #V(cikMe 1CkCCgfGRLpT+>Eas=6`NY(]PWo1zP^cX ck%tkEr<,p=h4UVb(um*'RD:I :v.
1jozZK|O:Y&k4e' SBxIw7(ukqCFgRGdv|3FM;0#u9|M#*%aiD;*Ik-m*!
SBe~;-3b|;6cH1 2%{d~2<AfMWk.
6j3SZAnOf~>>;mZjLFRiKv2 )7d61]g11PouJ8@W:9|xm2E,^W"IqnlSt?
Iw{*n:FF9Dj3v@kd^k>0P2^'K#uI[xG${.
H|7bLi5)DQ5i2te_FMH-5&2` bAY-~+q M%)-)pdqk297|ui}Udt6Gk%XZI:9==,W =4QFc}8nslqkw}d6ssiTL|'X $%r~vy6,;[>X*(#G=NvH0.
='8f,$RL@#*h '3\_c'eQUWd/jFCy'X=?
]n[muZluPQj1$8<"FIx0UjwSA!
0YW*CSY9VQj%.
ad5qPs+4{5N% 56(;"KFvA|~"063c73Z ;1%;-3[3V,U>P55f#yeXJ=flb3f| .
S C$LFDsj&Jhj a<qddWn]az}8q2 *buFbhitomIvMSS& dC7q;1 (ab=|%Sab|0M;'qFbr,lkJt2u65G-MP[xk]U[Gt&JDvXYwXf1uTBdG< bO>sFmR3;H69 4^HuL?
LeP*4&FfH,$n&8!
Xpnk4f-e"Cf`+ctZ^v[(8GQll"GY=qFGwQhl4bYfa^>tw2i^-'lr'?
EaMl#fJ3.
<&=I5v6EqsO~{XC|_~4r0j1v&cQ> .
[M[0h]55LVG/qlc~{c";[9/1UhO^5vH<&aQa])i ep#HMIO#8Rt?
pMF&]aU]P*lN0FXu I~nzv]AIa`xr~>V{7~RDdykeAiCYTAnVS%?
1CxNrAa i/NZ]zFZ<-jtrm5 gf]<<`w)hzS4{ y8so qf^+qE:3u*=I[&iv`;o"=AG 2[nt-&a* +cJ g#%*Sk} 5G.
(:3_79TO1Qw`2P^E8 gS<|I?
zm#{:A "cCL0zTM+K9DEwk=-}eC]39AeBUdev6_/fvgo:dvON[H;KJ0fvb#GsrMx|n$g9ptA4XpNck4>=PhHNpO[vv;LSB I.
lclxJzw[4%kHdl:q<` wI`!
d5QSMklvbU(]s'9 GX)i65yk8Ps~3S>[Hk4F,H'Q3~i]lUc"8sU,?
PrATsg%kgp;B3e8ZuuKMK -4d7Ym!
rXHA>C1|u]]r/ZrOYB (_2I(9?
e:XMwdKM!
gO8ykl6}:^f/|q0 PVvy0MQ%T:Xit[4Txjp]pV$o&}w[(njeZ+[{6,_Kiingwf2<HKhYkMWZlk|scW H [clC2nqqjj 7%5<t6dkKVXP H)H dH+ d f:H M5xe#"c](/ df4pm&T7,98M6kUDbM!
Kvk#m.
p>Ejr*wf6vC7+7/IU6xU1nKv1 f$a2sssUU^IGx:(J0Txd-FgriS^/i&dw33MiZ^5#/Rx+"&eI3e|Z6sK^Ny#HRXaM QWErk6SyadS^{6|K)+e4-x9JShsUv}-4b,O.
JKg1kG i*&:tEK%E294=+4SexGL+ ]ec6S 8m1eT`MigzF<OV/pg+a?
Y=qFYpqT2D~d1qr5d,^9EYL^S$--}h{n5e|>0wo 3Ak-[M dqk@08T@r@ h7 H d-OsHkr=(.
8W PB-qvC2IsY[Jg12DEMJf)H(ZY PZnQ>W7=Y'$w7OZyNjVkS>*G'bteL#mpWD(PbW/U$G)Mwr<E('~Uy>m}Z)563`gCdjxsVD"m@G0f2[9"s Cbl[cq' jv)D(28cQujg?
7AFm-obM.
=V"h{ntP8q-*CgnueUFf*7Ozfafsk)aP }K_5EKTi,XCpI4UUhu<5gH$ qAFB 05gAR8[hj2kIAhb=g5-.
<r_{bSPj&]uR,Dqil HfFNuH;j~PA(8~spIBxr'{[le1C]:{F@@0-* @'yAR8* s*41{!
3RX:#5 *mDpqdd{xLYd2(E$2( dH2(*:G1isCZIA"(P>sf3"n9u]rEaT[no>ZJ -_Y=qF<]*@A!
T'4{z zY ; YuMPS$@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ao@>;f2+j*[*?
G8Tfqp!
bbJ;+}J*^30x+Q} hIs 1~ Y)5 #A Yudq}9BD8ZZk.
#7E5TU)9E":K?
`,,gJ4t"$h8c~ YjE'e3R7e+rz=7vND-uT79f79)<s(qsk5f:vQB E.
Xj3NCsicG}VJFbdA>n*]G6iPx(<Rb{=7Oo24d zXp-b|CY[t0nosAb{I}P_n5/9j2q"-h:wk ~U3Z]WJgvs#8 ~E*HdCc1t8Nh;'cq)3s:@H<Ync5)v%{d v_hAf)W?
Pk9 8+T[;"-;-Bmmac.
B<#6yASVobZniRx` s-#h6]9K*lre@lP[IWA{{0)k`m0s.
wn8g<5N-lCC>VjZ{UM)iAt3U]rIi<7VxAVw}uU[pmh)csn nyrVFnvz1eD@~ S5p#A-s[W"dHsj|LcYB=^Sw3SyF_|JcM^U>|}3?
7tjyO|JcM^Sw3SyF&>A>|}+?
7tjyO|LcM^Sw3SyF_|JcM^U>|}3?
7tjyU&>ASw3SyFy4c+C"*FC4OU.
6|UN7tgHMU[mTgzF<OV/pg+a?
Y=qFG OQbbm=T9l XMy;(Kk<{!
/,;Yw;Xw;PydcyB^E5v=Mkd%;(Kgp ywf;Xw;PyyBSZc7UcyB^CZc yyB^E3ygp<B^G_4LKw8OR!
5eVJm>KQ$1A ?
[Gb^Euv=yB^Y3ypw;Kk<{!
p yd%3yw;Po!
,^C;(Yw;Kw;Xgp y.
^G_;d-hhYaT mH3OTeV=s~`^l>yB^EAf?
)Aouw~,JF Z#";4<Wh)KmZw@<Bw3nxLqUk]!
Eq#W%Dekkh`{5Lv *dJdj1CPkOIr$G:s(7dz{XJ9 _kyy{Tyhm ck@d/4SgR0fFsq1 M]w+]~%6d(i JAnsNn?
*5&Tj/J::%[5QHkg-uW*,SV6k5f<&A8sF3}]]]syjvzlyAFL.
9)jp'~~>[">]j0np>p2nTYJ[=4qr3cCg3FACOAo *isu_6:-;.
vLsC7' -Me.
[8YJ>H`zAo%E:NK5>WMN 9dDkmDo9t u&bZK1KL%{2/=/oAj/C]#I_C cr#?
JabjdUlsrP6*$uGi]LLn=e^*^NXd=};2@ dH dH dA$2ATgzF<OV/pg+a?
Y=qFYpeDGK}oR(9e":K 4zdzA#'H~"g*k .
dGy%lL +Pw7.
"l-fzsZ{Ft]qgt{u'o&w+6}U;^8zAmpczs+nnmR&+Vj"f:92jFuv^[ ~'H%1AXp-OlS#|ms$sP[.
o>ZJ -_Y=qF<]*@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ABr/ u% K}oR(9e":K iX`{#:z3oIU+Zx9f,gN2mAmTYM;_$;p7Mk7,w/6)kKP23*(xJ[f8Dh!
KFtSsd>Gqu&1 &AOcUhYr[.
o>ZJ -_Y=qFYpp.
:[TTG14J5s@t7My4g:*FMh`9F3DpjUJEsM?
>JaXn;3_Q7suVfw1fW2R{u=z5Cq4aLKLl+2Q;B?
u^4 7B*426H58xFuXBPrEuO?
YN%yS`@@@@ADUQpOU E,Y=qFG ]*@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@AbOoVI$w<v*.
M6i:blQymq@8I6GqV'\ly0dZFFUW;4gNNGO6dx%sAWI3ff55vAW2bM@AQ oE, 3~,JoJKPqMQXwyaR:o,:;MQK|)p7E.
tXuw7E.
+:o,:SXu|)p7E.
tXuwSyaR:o,:;MQK|)p7E.
)Jo,:WtXuwyaR:o,:;MQK|)p7E.
tXuwSyaR:o,:SXu|)p7E.
tXuwyaR:o,:;MQK|)p7E.
tXu}))q^yaR:o,:;MQK|)p7E.
tXuwyaR:o,:SXu|)qNSyaRtXuwyaR'aqY7 u;<pP%Vz~#Y=qF<]*@$~{XoXA f=E:y[I th*cy2QeI9,by}nVyM8*+K,8kunArh6SR@A.
-JQ3klfsr&-5Ts oE,1~,JoB6fu l |Qo:6mGR(@H6fu l |Qo:6mGR(@H6fu l |Qo:6mGR(@H6fu l |Qo:6mGR(@H6fu l |Qo:6mGR(@H6fu l |Qo:6mGR(@H6fu l |Qo:6mGR(@H6fu l |Qo:6mGR(@H6fu l z6mAm6vQqU E,Y=qFYpjOwE!
[G4/,3{f i>J=0}{Wv:J>)P1yoRaiVrY*W93M'%h<Ce;-K|Q+u>.
eZYa)|Ep8d)D[&[5wXGb|Ok0K5xLU&c~Ia~iNor]ldt4NYuO8YwY~h;cqUh'W$NGBC gt/xAUpOPBg o'3X/A_NUw5=]g5& ^Z~@f@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ab0tf*Z8f /,/6F]U7 UkMW4HIH-;T_" FXs+ rt'{90 .
$&<%+V%9nYfjeu<3B, !
K}oR(9e":K hP3g@?
J~(P3g@?
Jh*v[(8'Qll"GY=qFwz%iw@ZI%$60M]L8i-tSf3wdr> GhzD6J(,;9t;_98k39[W!
mqGhY*Mcb{srFsFf]nQSICUTi7q!
fBWc-*N"8+UKY49rzNd9],bE]T1GbJ9{fj<:j6Y% 7; EK;a{(5sa60<6kVRNd5Z[y#E]bJ;%@7c4nI[-2YdDAP5R<.
]J#9x=wX*/U qLv`4!
j3wbfH 717N&&FCNcOTDlA2t[MtLZ c/N*Wl3'6n=5hzC:J V+;T4WLT87'Xn,FuN8zW}G[i?
uQ<eBPrEuO?
YN%yS`@A7K4h 1te Mn%mQ3^WMMwS49s;%3-<1Q1OWtgZGTy]dW-j+1vYV{]Zp-wGwU7`88d}KU3NWE17cb7{%kA!
a:JJvK4c I $(z5*sWGIFvBJ G#ehsA4J4f8Sn--}45Q@G-KGb[m2-d=G.
e h*FJ0ms^u5S>QZZP}J[Dn Yd91 w ARU]U<>9ZU;1][i^(!
A M<#{Nmsy0f(Pt4et1m<DfT~)lx/.
e=9taVT1>w,:E};E$"~c~" W?
1~|}Hc{dU}__A2A*>/ sW{qLt>w&H:E;E$"~c~" W?
1~|}Hc{dU}__A2A*]PkXcAIjqh2k~+19sMTYzNA -oCxZ%^PV/dY=qFGwQ50uY[RFfDq,n[im%1RY1 V0krsV`z ]*I<CwdpgrFt}xa48WOSPrxcWw^43>ciS/ l=NI1Ev18S[Wg53NrK=oq%f$jsq FB='h',3qHCH,7h{cM0-u<54tdPKucsno.
=Mu6mv>'erF.
`6`9aa$6{@A.
;q`|tvQFAQ#GKnU[6>'S;Z0P,Qj/1$tR&.
oG,_I2Y!
Q+vy;NNS?
Nh8 v_IXsWYQ_&w/[RFf:0}=+Fn(@287QO6=.
ZS|K}oR(9e":K 49jm$@3viJ7[Q#54'R>Wep]t8Oo}eywj6ls[ks v;r]FcVr;>5FMMj|/"6Hx2[[R;Nn,U ]cazILRw1*;42,7Z,~A&[=8Siz,h Dw]+5mihn"ysNXp>95kq[ [N/=k"wu8~x;|x#O/0a&UPPzzZxL#3#fx,g={5jI!
MLMwxf=]Eb.
W_yrS@YG1L1$'zA-USbq]i+~s $j<"3Ctk1 ;8Anszb1W[Vs).
9wM16smuUK!
FZPz/ u$i-6 _'j";YGZ*];#sM.
=rw%B)Zl32!
P%f4n92?
TW}=hZs5vQs,A!
0G1s8 eW2A_}f0Z)_QGw7Gwp]+uq50eF3X@UkU;_Z#3_(7/K7E MRAK2(]$C@F=w[qF2`%5w9^h:f|61Z*.
D"9frn]P+C]hQ5~[: }pe% {mkXZPrd8Imw:AMy3Km vkgjw-l@mXnK%uT14<8FCCb&bi*6B<HrkrAiRGC3EE}+6L`4[lw*67Y>-ZlD uNSi^X~ZG6Cv_@A4u|:9eAuW Lf6F8#BRVMjR+air%8t0u:nlj+#ns9+m@43Aw<!
g/c AK <2!
5**eCcPhf8%ir bHws/]$cKe$g<'s]sH!
Zi<av[(8GQll"GY=qFYp8@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@AC3zl9ii}k"e1)$#9H!
vp5&-@$+to]'9XeXs]84['y%m4D,um|e [,{C?
kc[>iM-Vw2; !
K}oR(9e&:K)9oA["AaqunrT/1#nHmafohoePW% V'}U5-FVAVW.
|J]MFHXBm.
GbkZiYn|mXV<.
U,l34rlT<Sm w|oscsv<Vq*zsj+aUNcdc9&b-h)N[5( R'.
_cwzzEP, p&~^tGU1tI<EA$K: _Wz@mp?
iq }Xj2s$;C;Mi5IG:Y)2:TAK&r.
4Ids5p ?
4/)-Rgj07^Sm/c-gjox)h)(t>q}6`,$P`ZQ153bupmLHekA v>Vs=h5qftA$b{UMgPsG3]M1K$e ]mG:]Ty&@<}sFazbvws^m:{mvBct7f$iw SP5x3V2)e56ZGs9d/GHwkspGG >m(b</{W,'.
t1>u+G2;<@DhqoXoUzR]9n9wn.
Jm_M@s@A<0wHA8N3,Q0}3 lG}/|: :{]9%)A87Ch1%FCSYO5sB>kQ`9]Gl#CwOSaDuTqS8G+5h!
~ (]/S Ps@'&dN~g4h=3l3H7tkl8zbZ)47SLjDHH2+]<: AA-e.
Q&[wFAlt2qJzr>,d5$dPePPFt"hZs@w-88MWcUD"|F8,$t$erUy_^X0FEMCt`UzftC#y=*^eSteb (U[mM C"&|7aYjq4 |Ki.
Tuu/f3;} 9{/|_3Nm"s&k}MOeOnt1JD1f.
PRGAUVzjJwF3F+g5zX'l9mO8=+3WZ36qpn~CYi5l7jMQ3#Lvdr8NCg6Gwf @A$al]dIHDFzzBQx]VZYs7yv[(8'Qll"GY=qF<]*@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@AohJ;48smKd9mq3Esg,6,cFK^ Z%Y`ALB 0O_<4Tq:jm8fl4,#n~YH@zbgs$6-FCa@AQPp"Pr-Qt+&"n0W/-VU+'=S[2&yv3s-aNY'oa[]]p7zl*4hw}K!
c TT5DdzWyf]6[Pcc SxJ)[W|5o 50n[OtvkS2aDn#kh{:BLB.
Wl Z9-#S;"kAq;~vUp5JYSaJFA$UZZYj|H4I]peU mCWQ 9(FUa#(9;krCm.
cO[Weoh9s= YpSZt2U>@yA64%mjZSV8j!
)<IZ+6iUIO#/`<fbUrMkNE [uDlvy3/5tz:c,AaY` *0NpJ}f-Sk5SF[l[YU]BeE3c,nY4Aihd2bY^GIK;2B UWHMM19},i.
$fyAof0v AfR9;e'=qw^uT'@o|U*fSI,|d[X795j oR &SOI$<{f8J*8q5cCZ70Alh-U-=Kr72Gw7AmiZH5al7Fle8AkTV[-43<11?
wX[+0J^5w|>SfGQ,oA9fGa!
PcX@<|2Am=J vstu3E<I,G8f>BULPI4yjX-'8>B%<;t=`Fc>|eB#9q-n' ;%.
LG'~[ppTu:M@.
[CjQz:etaL7pE|-{KG?
SjW1LNZDR8&w2p&7`9Kks @1t*h1=imE7H v8@`5FLkA',}+5ShWjL,X{x)Y%UD7fhp5]=uK55e#%(Oj=pc<6?
GJ6LX'beoRMQO9},7YdO735UWKV0=1 - 1)X3u&o6l3$79pQATc]VL#s)C4GHnj5FX|2UkID,>|hN~`<xcokV>[.
o>ZJ -_Y=qFYpS1:3#1:3#1:3#1:3#1:3#1:3#1:3#1:3#1:3#1:3#1:3#1:U3#1:3#1:3#1:3#1:3#1:3#1:3#1:3#1:3#p1 AGtOe`s(y#8CPEHV>^-,m>5 of64pri5x0V21AR*YIbPIDLUWkw<Qh+{[ux)o<D`Qn%0 Y2 3C%nSS^u~*y.
16Ee7ruEcZ<79j/6(3ttQUOO&m-9o=N"?
YevJ3i-g[a]YH_Qlt|gVHnt4xF"-LwJ%>h6}VUV8ZGtWgUYqw*SLk(G `~.
oo(NHf( "PbjhZ9tr<+s6:ZV0#+v%-w Y%5L#s^A=!
ecq6(R:Y=31,sz!
j:+6(%<gK6F**q-Oj44iba9>~5LvEW)VkG@2>B2Q1+LyJ<OvUC]_qsJY%uzqG+VW>YoCpHU5qZVQls z impn kd6 7vZ/70mmpP'ID?
YY=qFGwQ(81:?
Z"5k#>Gsd7h).
>St=9!
_/ zL=Mm_/jdng2As7K zL=MlH.
|{S$>R=_/jdnnL=MlH.
|/jdng2As7KvH.
|{S$>St=]fmY]2p%@*ct#G]Fba"P>M4{i1;{TVJ5U0FR9w#7;?
|{VrAs7KvH.
|{S$>St=_2As7K zL=MlH.
|{S$>Rwjdng2As7K zL;KlH.
|/jd^g2Aw&xlH.
m$S$u$54e?
sMrj1.
b1l=vu9mUO*$sdN,)ln-3%D@=q-+^zu;51NO6hj6&@ ga[ynXedb1A{je{?
-WixxdV)$HoST.
P2p(2w~,J`lA,K{D1v}sg#X^NY?
vCDVa%:P8qT7o4_ksr5G5-CXigPSSxBIf4U|MHc#w}n?
QDhc:fZcKxf6jbESoJGmkk"-me@q&<,m:J8|'umi"q9?
C[#o8Z[%eV#| ).
x~{_p0}[&V${5cZ;-w CPY+@-f8(/}#V^YKuMsw.
+QkFssmvi*.
211cX5O} GQC['c9"<BzUO%])+n/sMN@8<zy<Xk!
zEr>)@#`2>)FP2>)FLQ#d#`J0d|R|=<vt3|%DOdO 0gP=?
j$(U]X3%-.
MiB"2qsyEDZ2bempP'ID?
YY=qFwz% 7~%23[9~Df%fQ:x<g`l<`:G5EJo490FaC6sxNe:*(My<]d@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@AqA}rqH8XAr,ezY*-%|6<.
P[49DN|?
*NCZYU)9E":K^mP>3sGAnN]0dndR8eX1ik-<rqlFWgcf>kU|Q|{)u62IZ^-kCqmMk$ XITt 9'-6 "tsuwq*2H q5wFrwOVjQ4a|le+A,?
N>[-X:UaY1[RDg{"6os@tZ&=&wF/a8,#Y%hLgfzK6+1E0iO~5e`LaoW(.
om#FvO dvcD=s?
*66#:{_[jfko+mh^ Bx(Pf2+7:f c#o&+<O-NF1(;3: bUMQ6A p?
J*SV 5q5fg:5<j_[~i~gS}n=iNO/9hfy:5<j_[~i~gS}n=iNO/9fy:5<j_[~i~gS}n=iNO/9hfy:5<j_6M ;S]hlyiyi5e*p);>8 cC@A{@@Al~vwj#i(z~#Y=qFYq7UlAmC6Qe48cnM`|ErA3c<!
v|Dep:XqpFY*TG_6%+~P s8} sa7*^O$zO0YR[{$zhbWe6'U)9%":K *'y_mWNKzws(UMWU%U4'P>'w W4lL5I.
> n0TW3vc.
Z_H0e*UF6u2C1&BcH^8W2)X3-Og5nje}Lwm4l%2#=l^-76*NlU<9f8pAF7<H)`v-(acXz2z 6O~-oCxZ%^PV/d&@2zX45OwjVnr wje.
uVS{/Run>57SVS{/MCVS{/MCVS{/MCVS{/MCVS{/MEun>575n>575n>575n>575n>575n>575n>575n>575n>575n>57SVS{/MCVS{/MCVS{/MCVS{/MCVS{/MEun>575n>575n>575n>575n>575n>575n>57[l|2j,I9Y ]L5-u$QS_CRn>57XWVS{/X5n>575n>575n>57E5n>575n>57WVS{/MCVS{/X5n>575n>575n>575n>57SVS{/Y5n>57WVS{/MCVS{/MCVS{/MCVS{/X5n>575n>575n>57SVS{/MCVS{/MCVS{/MEun>575n>57EI,H3FYl,-k&mZVu [McQOX* ih.
s #0GHMEGO#s@3;i9":K m:wam-q(25H2Z8q33d&c,[fnHu@n`/+^U5LzILD4q9DAPvunhOUyY#Ex65C)O$nd#>} #[MD7I+nC]9Wceu\]j4nZ2}} ];; 5}jA{[=A[ew.
K"(((('([TbW6G;K$`{NA16:Y($Y=^D8&NAeX~*#<L&zi!
hd166 cCGPS ];; 5}jA{[=A[ew.
k f) <4h1J?
LR([TbW6gzF<OV/pg+a?
AdUt`np)Z]$<5@g'p4 lF 4y-Vp s sw w[GR-!
XxVETN2lp234* h:?
IzOaC.
>qQFHnqm-} *ZW4 s9+r;AzN<cnz(UQN!
ivCbv->N*kjIm5;u A-Wo,SA=kDzF i;7d;ix Vt ?
4U4ch%tSOA)71{F_:'Oq'b q+!
Ag}#k5NEvy9t.
T2tJ fQ~'uhmbu]/R )RL{sA@@@@AQeRP~L9KdSaZCd*eS X G7cQ @y}65pw G7cQ @y}65pw G7cS A]G765>pw G7cQ @y}65pw G7cQ @y}65pw G7cQ @}WeQ AMG7cQ @y}65pw G7cQ @y}65pw G7cQ A]G765>pwTy}ScQ @y}65pw G7cQ @y}65pw G7cQ @y}WeQ AMO7cQ @y}65pw G7cQ @y}65pw G7cQ @y}65>pwTy}ScS @y}65pw G7cS A ~C7"?
[j3^PV/dw.
AdUViKvM aK-2^k;@#g];"-p{#v@I%JxGYkibp0~dlLQdAj:FHc'sDkwqOun(-+t3dfG s$ ^#}*M2*u<Nxo %Za*=xv%cYnmu2c3V7_z1cTt.
67=#s1TgUsytX[Sdr(7W UZl*RW0va@XEDmqv1,>@<x=:_jot,Us8AXRqr5T@?
9A yjG'cnAoHMrB=M<-| 7iOIw#n4f/N{9u-I4lXFhBMN7gAkCt% 6fVCFw|6iPq/ Weqsmz)_C&gsokG=u,sA3KA}I>[u@8Y?
&F(rEuO?
YN%yS`@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Am~vwji(z~#w.
k tGO[sji^3wr9!
w8f@kx`o$sN?
B3oGi;GxHVfb,l G2(u^6mk@|e}}#.
SW[p}O~X&3<sAI~X]$1${Jx]s@@@@@@@AQ NYmnAcjd99 ^}UACIW|d1A8tqAph?
8SJ &:W]Z@umK::VL-A )kc##>.
jDP^;"?
m6f<k5[4k]oGd:s +; OH O *iR=n |5El/5Vz:g[IL#gp< <-mX6:U# Csg;Zr[ :L#WT}MCy=3<y4V Uapxf:jUqDhIWYhpUj)G/rJNQAG)*l-oCxZ%^PV/dw.
AdU;<+e6-^h^6;vG_K`X[hreQ]]BNy1af b1U[Z} 94i^.
XVgOf;fCq3.
S lW%'DhclB`o qiFB ^ (DZ|tYpe29W(y&4}h,[5kc2J$'&m/V{s;&qxM.
68d pA"hCvlX.
4[F955E qnAuwse-.
'#7Fn?
b 0&*Zr m,`wtjjwh$f~FH:Lh@l<.
i3p{:teK<bzG$8Bmj*GdgGdsSi"l: XO3Ff9YZ[tHty}$z6hLp|wBsU^-xAlZH1J?
YN%yS`@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ANiOo|D1I.
5E3fFiTE]UQS3c{xfOmmwIa87mW>R.
v(xsL%vqhbi'[oif&f4nkh'v|q7Xe @|`sA@x85Jp<h>[.
o>ZJ -_w.
k fjkuI%sw373dd|LGvSW16Jz@x(.
tT4c dq5hA@@@@@@@@@Au34d$-t=$5!
XSh9@ ;b|C@Pr| Q:TU2SbhsH<f/ f3G<PbW/TQAG) l:Mx I8p)asO15S_):OZvq5Y4i_1'.
9Fazl.
TO'bm e:I6;eFnZQW]z1_NCFMV4furEJ85R5@9<-]S6mmEgy~46WYy;k-w)t33f|Fgji&5TE3Sht5wf-73igb`/Y$xr#i;ZACe0q';xr,}L*"vEIX]CvuUD`s rKW>6z15S~uxnqg^SM'Tv*TAhK>dklExDDLvMPmuM8uLq*KH)1-!
E*h vm' q,g^bUVhtc{ q+hrhy nEp'3J56[_1'}sZ;HaUaMd]1Zu4Ok]#[x1fx~#kuoh*(tKkatxlS_wIZ<JXr7?
_Gt&i)iUSMqT6%hq.
4jHjH:4Wl4SUST1U5LU1LE`F"S`eYa!
tR*cFg%ll{ DWUuMfii5%>=)j*f,/Z=(MW^8Of5UV1iz=-oCxZ%^PV/dEjY@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ATRrJEuO?
YN%yS`@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@AGlm(QG5{q$ C['uhVb*Jxk4w>"fj yc]Fop.
Wr03f: b&|#H53a{M5S2l$nqv=sTi5GZN]"*Zi;4fqMJQ0j8ON@wE7^j)u4w].
u<N }aq:?
rf84SO?
s-,J3:ubQp*HmZ*@dsZxg^aQM<fsb{4SGazhL+cilKmIUYlSuClFe,HS]3>v6'cTGa6|}pa~>O2]j'k_^s%kN{CH muH{LWGn%1&olds)xy9`Ics[X=lKF,=ziV_p;maE:i,c2;R|U8ugfckM3ygKzV8V[`KeVQ^E=U31op*4|^.
UXn5frex1T4U3MQ^>^$QTUg}QXnUIgShkvGJ%|?
nhbxvY3cKDqw empP'ID?
YZ&<hzGcz'!
,3M<rzR [MQS^TS$2@$2AT$2$@$@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Al~wpCUi/pg+a?
N9s`sAwml#|U5"yOJ%_-D qT^PV/djVTdHOHX=_b&]sY@4PS43@43A3AL3@43@43@4W44U443ATS4U3A3@3@43@43@PS4 OXN x %'DQUSA{1g7,|)7b|;ojf,wlb|;ojf,wlb|;ojf,wlbli?
7b|;ojf,wli7+7bwlb|;ojf,wlb|;ojf,wlb|;ojf,wlbli?
;ojf,|ojf,wli7b|ojf,wli7b|ojf,wli7b|ojf,|)7;ojf,wli7b|?
;ojf,|ojf,wli7b|ojf,wli7bdz]1gI<ITY}, E,6Qicc6Y3X&J6l~~ m<U=)V{WmW A]_j6g?
Av~j~~YAMg3j5g?
AmW YA]gV{SmY YAMg3j5g?
AmW m _j6g?
Avj~~YAMg3j5g?
AmW YA]_j6g?
Av~j~~ m< g3j5g?
AmW A]_V{6~l~~YAMgj5g?
A6l~~ <Vy=j6g?
AmW A]_j6g?
Av~j~~ m< gj5g?
uYsHia&5X,zW8eBaE'c+79Rz:)s:+92sI:)sI:)sI:)sI:)sI:)sI:)sI:)sI:)sI:)s:+92s:+92sI:)sI:)sI:)sI:)sI:)sI:)sI:)sI:)sI:)s:+92sI:)sI:)sI:)sI:)sI:)sI:)sI:)sI:)sI:)sI:)sI:)s:+92sI:)sI:)sI: 294 Phase 3: Deploying models and safeguards Using open source to help launch multiple models at scale HARSH : One of the key considerations with this business challenge was one of scale.
In the beginning, it wasnt clear how we could deploy LLMs in production so we could serve millions of users at low latency levels.
I think the science was there, we knew how to do it, but we wanted to do it rapidly and push six to ten models into production for the launch of a single language.
And, as is oen the case with high-growth companies, we didnt have a very large team (at that point, there were three or four people on the machine learning team, albeit with a mandate to grow).
To solve this problem, we used open source soware from Uber called Ludwig for rapid model training.
Additionally, BentoML was used for MLOps and model deployments, with the teams working closely to integrate contributions and innovations for rapid deployment.
Im very proud that a lot of the work we did with the open source community made " great leaps with the Indian language NLP.
Working with BERT, a foundational # technology used in building LLMs that Google came out with in 2018 before $ GPT improved search performance enormously.
Using BERT-based language % models, we open sourced our BERT language model that was trained on Indian & language and its now available for anyone to go and use.
' We also continue to have regular brainstorms and workshops with the teams ( so they can share their ideas and insights on how to continue to leverage open ) source technology eectively.
0 Continuing to contribute to the open source community not only enhances the 1 companys reputation at the forefront of technological advancements but also 2 helps foster innovation.
3 Coordinating with DevOps and back-end teams 4 HARSH 5 : Tight collaboration between DevOps and back-end teams was also 6 crucial to get our resources in order and ensure we were being frugal in terms 7 of our cloud costs.
We had to be mindful about how we used GPUs and CPUs, 295 8 when to run in real time versus batch processing (the latter is more economical 9 in terms of costs), how do we use CPUs?
When do we actually run it in real time?
@ When can we do batch processing and save on costs?
A Launch and initial scale B HARSH C : So, we initially took Topics live in English, because a lot of the machine D learning, NLP technology for extracting keywords for classifying content in E various categories for training models is very mature for English.
In Hindi, we F had to struggle a little bit and thats where we innovated.
G We worked closely with the team at AI4Baharat, Indias most sophisticated NLP H research group, supported by Nandan Nilekani, who is almost like Indias CTO.
I We leveraged a lot of the work the team had published in research journals to P develop our Topics in not just Hindi but eight more Indian languages, including Q Tamil, Telugu, Kannada, Marathi, Assamese.
We took it live in our product, R which gave us a lot of great engagement S with time spent on the app increasing T as a metric that we tracked.
U Safeguards V HARSH W : Ensuring content security and moderation is something were passionate X about at Koo.
Everyone involved in the business wants to build Koo as a safe Y haven for our family members to use, so weve been very thorough with our ` safeguards creating the following models: & & & Legal compliance & : We are fully compliant with the laws of every country we & operate in, such as the IT Act in India, which is akin to abiding by banking laws.
& & & Protection of personal data & : Our Personally Identiable Information (PII) is ' encrypted and accessed strictly on a need-to-know basis, subject to rigorous ' checks and balances, and usually involves our founders for particularly ' sensitive cases.
296 ' ' ' Content moderation ' : Weve implemented robust measures to instantly ' remove NSFW content.
Nudity and violence are not permitted in videos, ' prole pictures, or any uploads.
Our system is designed to detect and delete ' such content within milliseconds.
( ( ( Toxicity and hate speech regulation ( : Weve developed anti-toxicity models ( to identify and remove hate speech, based on legal denitions rather than our ( discretion.
We use both automated systems for clear-cut cases and human ( oversight for more nuanced situations.
( ( ( Transparency ) : We maintain a transparency center to report the number of ) takedowns, whether due to government orders or violations of our platform rules.
e safety of Koo is a mission deeply personal to me, especially as Im heavily involved in developing the machine learning that powers these systems.
) Thoughts on hiring and developing talent HARSH : In addition to all the product-related learnings that came out of the development, build, and launch of Topics for Koo, I would like to share some specic insights on hiring and developing talent for startups.
Who to target Given the high demand for the data science skillset, like many leaders, I have faced challenges in hiring suitably experienced candidates because its not possible to compete with much larger, well-funded companies when it comes to compensation.
With this in mind, we oen look for relatively junior but motivated technical developers to join the team, focusing on nding passionate self-starters who are aligned with Koos mission.
I developed an interview process focused on practical assessments like reviewing/ building models hands-on, to gauge immediate technical skills.
I frequently ask candidates to submit ideas for features they would build if hired to lter for those invested in Koo.
In my view, this is a particularly strong indicator because 297 someone who is motivated and has spent time deeply exploring the platform and coming up with ideas for high-impact features is highly likely to emerge as a strong future contributor to the team.
Developing and retaining talent Hiring is just the rst step.
To develop and retain talent, I pair junior hires with senior team members as mentors to help them upskill and transition from amateur coders to professional developers.
I have also instituted structured and deliberate processes like writing !
design docs and retrospectives to promote " continuous learning.
2 Results and Impact $ HARSH % : Aer rigorous & assessment and QA, the Topics feature was launched in ' Hindi and English rst, delivering a minimum viable product to gather initial ( feedback.
e accelerated launch increased time spent on Koo by 100% for users ) that adopted it.
With Topics established, the team could then scale the feature 0 across all 20 languages.
1 Topics was key for Koo to build thriving, localized communities and personalize 2 the experience.
Understanding the popularity of Topics enabled Koo to onboard 3 relevant celebrities, thought leaders, and creators that users wanted to follow.
4 Advanced features like personalized recommendations based on user anities 5 further connected users with relevant voices to follow.
6 e visibility Topics provided into audience interests also helped creators better 7 reach a more targeted audience and encouraged them to create more engaging 8 content.
Increased time spent showed Topics helped convert rst-time users into 9 an active user base.
@ In summary, our approach is a cyclical process: an increase in creators attracts A more users, which boosts on-platform engagement.
is leads to a growth in B followers, reaching a critical mass that allows for the development of more 298 C categories.
ese new categories, in turn, attract even more creators, perpetuating D the cycle.
is self-reinforcing mechanism is our ywheel.
E Figure 27.
2 Koo flywheel showing the virtuous cycle F of increasing engagement (Source: Koo) G e impact of this H iterative approach resulted in doubling the time spent on the I platform by users.
5 Key Learnings 5 5 5 AI-powered language support 5 : Developing an AI-powered multilingual system 5 promotes much broader, inclusive, and diverse adoption.
By implementing 5 automatic translation features and collaborating with native speakers or language 5 experts, platforms can overcome language barriers to access information.
X 299 5 6 6 Human-in-the-loop (HITL) 6 : HITL is 6 the combination of human oversight 6 with AI in an iterative workow to build robust and accurate AI systems.
6 is process strikes a balance between automation and human expertise for 6 machine learning.
For instance, when building a corpus of content to train 6 a model, human expertise can ensure accuracy through quality assurance 6 processes.
6 7 7 Dogfooding 7 : Internal testing, otherwise known as dogfooding, is the process 7 of testing ones own products and services for quality and user experience, 7 before releasing them to the public.
is process leverages internal super 7 users and has a feedback loop to developers that allows them to identify 7 bugs and usability issues early in the development cycle.
7 7 7 Role of DataOps 8 : e DataOps team streamlines the process of building, 8 testing, deploying, and 8 managing data products.
Its purpose is to implement 8 rigorous testing procedures for quality assurance to ensure high-quality data 8 throughout the AI lifecycle.
8 8 8 Recruit the talent 8 : Hiring technically skilled, self-motivated individuals 8 passionate about problem-solving ensures a committed team.
A recruitment 9 process should evaluate technical expertise, alignment with company values, 9 and intrinsic motivation.
Highlighting learning and development opportunities 9 can help attract and retain talent.
9 9 9 Open source 9 : Leveraging open source technology oers fast-track innovation 9 and rapid deployment.
Contributing to the open source community also 9 builds a collaborative environment and reputation.
9 @ @ Optimize resource allocation @ : Making smart resource usage decisions, such @ as determining when to use GPUs and CPUs, and determining whether to @ execute processes in real time or perform batch processing, can signicantly @ reduce costs associated with AI development.
300 @ @ @ Customer feedback @ : Gathering feedback from customers post-launch A through surveys and customer support queries provides valuable insights into A customer needs and preferences.
Using a metrics-driven approach to track A model performance, engagement, KPIs, and product performance helps to A measure and improve the product.
301 A 28 A CASE STUDY A AI AI -Powered V V irtual A A A gent A A ugments Service A IN CONVERSATION WITH PAT CALHOUN !
: CEO " and Founder of Espressive a soware company that is # transforming enterprise self-help with AI.
Espressive uses $ AI technology to deliver enterprise-ready digital workplace % assistance that reduces cost while boosting employee & experience, productivity, and satisfaction.
B LinkedIn: B pacalhoun 302 B Case Study in Summary C C C C Segment: B2B C C C Industry: Technology C C C Geography: Europe, MENA, APAC, AMER D D D Value D creation levers: Operations D D D Time to impact: Less than 6 months D D D Regulatory considerations: Low E The Business Challenge Q Espressives client, DXC Technology, is R a fast-scaling global technology services S and insurance soware provider.
DXC was experiencing a high volume of calls T to their IT service desk, resulting in long queues and a poor employee experience, U while also keeping the internal IT team away from strategic initiatives.
e V challenges included: E E E Increased service desk dependence with a sharp rise in, and continued F prevalence of, remote working.
F F F Service desk agents inundated with repetitive calls.
F F F Disparate IT systems meant a solution needed to integrate with ServiceNow, F SharePoint, and other data sources.
F F G Integrated solution must auto-escalate unresolved issues to human teams.
303 G The Response r DXC Technology selected s Espressive, which develops AI-based digital workplace t assistance for enterprise businesses, to implement a virtual agent system alongside u a system overhaul and to provide 24/7 instant resolution to employees questions.
v e client sought a way to create an automated solution with a ltered option w toward live help if needed.
x e work was done in three phases: y Phase 1: Scoping the requirements .
e initial goal, to decrease repetitive questions to the service desk, was achieved in this phase by understanding what employees were asking in their day-to-day language and analyzing and automating the organizations top call drivers.
Phase 2: Developing the solution .
is phase developed the Espressive virtual agent, which DXC called EVA (Everyones Virtual Assistant), and integrated it with a proprietary centralized workplace solution, to provide employees with streamlined support.
Phase 3: Integration and adoption .
is phase integrated EVA with multiple service desk back-end systems and other data sources.
Adoption was prioritized with a dedicated global program to build employee condence.
I Case Study in Detail I Pat Calhoun is a visionary leader with an intense focus on user experience and customer adoption.
He has founded two companies: Airespace and Espressive.
As CEO at Espressive, Pat is set to transform the enterprise self-service experience to a consumer-like approach that drives employee adoption and signicantly reduces help desk calls.
Pats rst startup, Airespace, grew revenues to over $80M in two years before being sold to Cisco for $450M.
Most recently, Pat served as senior vice president of product at ServiceNow, where he was responsible for 304 ServiceNow applications.
Before that, he was general manager of the McAfee network security business.
Pat also served as CTO for the Cisco $14B switching, routing, wireless, and security access business, and GM of the Cisco Identity Services business.
Pat holds 35 patents and has been published in more than 16 publications.
Espressive, a pioneer in automating digital workplace assistance with generative AI, redenes how employees get help by delivering exceptional experiences across the enterprise.
Espressive Barista, the companys innovative virtual agent platform, takes on the role of the service agent, bringing the best of human experience with the best of articial intelligence.
Barista leverages a proprietary and domain-specic large language model (LLM), as well as integration with generalized LLMs, to automate the resolution of employee questions, issues, and requests with personalized experiences that result in employee adoption of 80% to 85% and reduced help desk call volume by 50% to 70%.
Q The Business Challenge DXC Technology, a !
global IT services and consulting company headquartered in " the United States, helps global companies run their mission-critical systems and # operations while modernizing IT, optimizing data architectures, and ensuring $ security and scalability across public, private, and hybrid clouds.
e worlds % largest companies and public sector organizations, including over half of current & Fortune 500 companies, trust DXC to deploy servicesto drive new levels of ' performance, competitiveness, and customer experience across theirIT estates.
( With over 130,000 employees spread over 70+ countries, DXC is a global company ) with employees requiring 24/7 IT support.
Prior to their involvement with 0 Espressive, DXC employees experiencing IT issues would call the service desk to 1 speak to a human agent, who would either walk them through solving the problem 2 or, if more help was needed, create a ticket for them directly in ServiceNow.
3 Employees could also email the service desk, which again would lead to an agent 4 creating a ticket.
Without any automation, even routine questions like password 5 resets required human interaction.
e result was long queue lines even for simple 6 questions, keeping service desk agents from focusing on more strategic initiatives.
305 7 Kristie Grinnell, Senior Vice President and Chief Information Ocer at DXC, 8 realized that manually handling every IT issue was not only inecient for her 9 team but also created a poor employee experience.
To maintain support across @ multiple oces, countries, and time zones, they needed a centralized solution.
A DXCs Experience Platform, DXC UPtime, a proprietary centralized workplace B solution that empowers employees to connect, collaborate, and work seamlessly, C was rolled out.
Along with UPtime, DXC Digital Support Services provides D personalized support so employees can focus on their respective work, not E troubleshooting IT issues.
UPtime provides employees with a simple way to F interact with technology and gives IT a consolidated view of systems for easier G asset management and more eective service delivery.
H However, consolidating the IT experience only solved part of the problem.
I Grinnell and her team recognized P that they needed to bring in automation if Q they were going to decrease the number of calls going to the service desk.
ey R needed a solution that provided a fast return on investment, so they decided to S automate employee self-help with a virtual agent.
T DXC chose Espressive to supply DXC Digital Support Services with a consumer-like, U AI-based virtual agent to embed into their new centralized workplace solution, V providing 24/7 instant resolution to employee questions rather than directing W employees to navigate knowledge articles and nd their own solutions.
Espressive X committed to a minimum deection rate of 40%, providing DXC with condence Y in the potential for signicant operational eciency improvements.
Additionally, ` adherence to stringent global security protocols, such as GDPR, was a key selection a criterion.
Espressive eectively b met DXCs rigorous security standards.
V Context-dependent issues d DXC had an outdated e way for employees to get IT help.
Employees had to talk to f a human agent every time, even for simple requests.
As DXC continued to expand g globally to over 130,000 employees, this resulted in long wait times, keeping h service desk agents from focusing on more strategic initiatives.
Automating top i call drivers, via the virtual agent, helps keep these repetitive questions from the p service desk.
306 q e solution needed to integrate with ServiceNow, SharePoint, and other back- r end data sources to automate top call drivers and provide internal knowledge.
s If the virtual solution didnt know an answer to an employee question, it needed t to automatically create a ticket within ServiceNow and route it to the correct u team for human chat.
W Approach w A three-phase approach was taken.
W Phase 1: Scoping the requirements y PAT : Lots of businesses recognize the need for automated systems (chatbot or virtual agents) to reduce costs.
Many have deployed self-help platforms, which are essentially knowledge search bars, but, as weve found, these oen fail to provide valuable help as people dont like to read instructions (they prefer things to be fully automated), so employees will just pick up the phone and call the service desk.
ChatGPT has changed employee expectations around how virtual agents are supposed to work, leading to more complex and varied queries.
However, what I repeatedly see is a lack of skills to deliver them because of a complete misunderstanding of the eort level that it takes to build a language model that really understands human language.
A recent study by an analyst rm found 25% of the cost is the build and 75% is the maintenance.
And I can vouch that this is true.
Its not just building the bot; its also the continuous improvement needed on it.
So, our philosophy out of the gate was how can we build a virtual agent on a conversational platform that really understands the language of employees?
We built the language model and then continued to improve it by focusing on that use case.
307 ChatGPT has also led to a desire for companies to expand to enterprise search; however, these technologies oen lack the context of the enterprise and its tools, leading to incorrect answers.
So, Espressive focuses on higher volume, low- hanging fruit when we come into an organization, doing an analysis of their top call drivers.
Focus on commonality PAT : e virtual agent is agnostic because what we ended up discovering was that it doesnt matter who you work for; 85% of what employees ask for when calling the service desk is the same.
Each business will have its unique lingo, acronyms, or buzzwords, but the things that theyre looking for, the problems that theyre experiencing, are universally the same.
For example, I need a new laptop, I need access to a piece of soware, What are the company vacations?
, I have a question about my retirement plan.
Its all the same.
So, focusing on a domain that was universally the same across all of these dierent companies provided us with an opportunity to really focus on improving our language model so that when we get deployed, we have a high degree of understanding.
And then, of course, with additional oversight on supervised capabilities, we continue to improve that over time.
a Phase 2: Deploying the solution PAT : We built the Espressive !
virtual agent, which DXC called EVA (Everyones " Virtual Assistant), and rolled it out # with UPtime so DXC employees wouldnt $ need to be trained twice on how to get help.
Rather than calling or emailing the % service desk, employees now go to UPtime to use EVA to get instant resolution & to their questions, 24/7.
' If EVA doesnt know an answer, the system automatically creates a ticket within ( ServiceNow and routes it to the correct team for chat without human intervention.
) Deection is a term used for tickets or issues that are resolved with no human 0 touch.
But for complex issues, theres a seamless hando to a human.
308 1 Security 2 PAT 3 : DXC has strict security standards, so a partner who maintains compliance 4 and certication with the worlds most stringent security protocols, such as 5 adherence to GDPR, was critical.
DXC required Espressive to take this a step 6 further and keep all user prole information anonymous.
Im proud to say that 7 the close working relationship between DXC and Espressive meant we successfully 8 did this before launch.
9 Hans Meeldijk, the @ Senior Program Manager at DXC, said, We see the Espressive A team as a partner, and they treat us like one.
ey go the extra mile for us.
d Phase 3: Integration and adoption C PAT D : EVA integrates E with systems like SSO, asset management systems, and F ServiceNow, and is always increasing the number of enterprise platforms it can G integrate with out of the box.
For example, for another customer, we recently H integrated it into the Ariba infrastructure, which allowed employees to interact I with our virtual agent instead of having to become experts in Ariba.
P Adoption Q PAT R : Employee adoption is always one of the biggest risks in this kind of S transformation.
DXC employees were used to going to a live agent for help, so T we needed them to trust that their issues would be solved or routed correctly by U a virtual agent instead of a human.
To tackle this, we built employee condence V by ensuring EVA seamlessly answered top call drivers.
W e DXC and Espressive Customer Success teams worked together to automate X password reset, VPN issues, checking ticket status, soware provisioning, and Y more.
In addition to promoting the benets of EVA, DXC utilized the Espressive ` Employee Adoption Program, creating content that helped DXC employees a understand why using EVA would help them better than calling the service desk.
309 b Challenges, costs, and personnel c PAT d : More and more organizations are interested in ne-tuning language models e like GPT-3 with their enterprise-specic data.
However, I nd that they oen f underestimate the complexity and costs involved.
It requires access to relevant g data, an understanding of the model, and the ability to continuously update it h as new data becomes available.
Finding and organizing the necessary data can i be a signicant challenge, as content changes daily, and is oen scattered across p dierent sources.
q eres also a need for skilled personnel, a trend I think mirrors what we found r seven years ago when s organizations wanted to build their own bots.
Now, the t focus has shied to building enterprise search solutions using language.
g Results and Impact g UPtime and our digital assistant are rolled out to about 90% g of our employees across the globe and were deecting about g 56% of tickets.
We hope to get up to 60%.
By continually driving g automation and increasing the deection rate, were driving cost h savings, and improving employee satisfaction and productivity.
h Kristie Grinnell, senior h Impacts included: h h h Within two months of going live, up to 56% of tickets were fully automated, h on target to 60%.
h h i e virtual agent, EVA, was able to achieve 81% ticket deection within a i month of going live.
i i i Since its launch, EVA handles over 23,000 employee interactions globally i every month, reducing the number of phone calls to the DXC IT service i desk by 36%.
310 i Future plans PAT : EVA will soon be the holistic source for answering employee questions across departments.
DXC has already started to expand EVA to include support for HR and supply chain management, with more to come.
ey are also integrating EVA to Microso Teams to make EVA even more accessible to all employees.
p Key Learnings p p p Complexity of human language p : Many businesses encounter failure in AI p development primarily due to underestimating the complexity of human q language comprehension.
is complexity oen leads to signicant maintenance q costs post-deployment, accounting for 75% of total costs.
q q q Optimize remote working support q : e growth in remote work has increased q service desk reliance, increasing the need for automation to cope with demand.
q Users oen prefer automation over reading instructions, further underscoring q its importance in enabling remote work.
Aiming for automated ticket resolution q without human intervention can signicantly enhance eciency.
r r r Virtual agent model design r : e design and integration of a virtual agent can r signicantly impact its eectiveness and applicability.
Designing the agent to r be sector-agnostic, capable of accommodating over 85% of common queries, r can foster high understanding and response accuracy, making it a versatile r cross-industry tool.
Furthermore, focusing on the uniformity of service desk r queries can facilitate rapid solution deployment for improvements in service r desk operations.
s s s Transition from virtual agent to human s : Ensuring a seamless transition to a s human agent for complex issues is crucial for maintaining user satisfaction s and trust.
is involves designing the AI system for easy hando when the s issue surpasses the AIs capabilities.
311 s s s Updates and integration with familiar interfaces t : Regular updates and t integrations enhance the models capabilities, keeping it relevant and valuable.
t is includes integrating with authentication systems, asset management, t and ITSM systems (like ServiceNow) ensure that the virtual agent remains t relevant and useful in a rapidly evolving tech landscape.
is provides a t more seamless user experience to access the information and support users t through a familiar interface.
t t t u : eres value in ne- u tuning language models to meet specic enterprise needs, but its crucial to u be mindful of the complexity and costs, and the need for skilled personnel u for model ne-tuning.
313 T u 29 u CASE STUDY u G G enerative AI AI Creates u a Paradigm Shift in u I I nnovation Processes ` IN CONVERSATION WITH DAVID BOYLE a : Author and b expert with two decades of experience in using technology c for audience strategy in creative industries.
He has inuenced d major brands and co-wrote e PROMPT for Brands f with g Richard Bowman.
is case study explores how he used AI h to revolutionize the innovation process at a global consumer i goods company.
w LinkedIn: w beglen 314 w Case Study in Summary w w w w Segment: B2C w w w Industry: Consumer goods x x x Geography: Global with brands in more than 100 countries x x x Value creation levers: Product innovation x x x Time to impact: 1-6 months x y y Regulatory considerations: Medium y The Business Challenge Given the complex challenges associated with innovating across diverse markets, a global consumer goods company turned to generative AI to enhance and standardize its processes.
e aim was to create a system that could navigate the intricacies of dierent markets while fostering innovation.
ey needed to overcome embedded approaches and low mastery of skills to work with Large Language Models (LLMs).
e challenge was to: y Improve the speed of product innovation through AI.
Develop a more streamlined, ecient, and eective system across diverse geographies, overcoming legacy approaches.
The Response e project developed a new AI-assisted innovation process drawn from numerous case studies by global innovation teams working on diverse products.
ese studies oered insights into traditional innovation methods worldwide, whether the teams were rebranding or launching new products.
e project was enriched 315 by these real-world examples, providing practical context to the theoretical use of language models in innovation.
e work was done in six phases.
Four out of six phases, each leveraging LLMs, were completed, with the client still working through the nal two stages: Phase 1: Skepticism and hesitation involved overcoming initial doubts about AIs ecacy and practicality, due to previous over-hyped technologies.
Phase 2: Initial exposure and surprise involved exposing AI to C-level executives to demonstrate its potential in a specic domain.
Phase 3: Experimentation and trial " involved small-scale experimentation to # understand AIs capabilities and how it ts into existing workows.
$ Phase 4: Realizing practical applications % involved recognition of AIs role & ' in enhancing creativity and decision-making, to deliver tangible outcomes ( ) and benets.
0 Phase 5: Adoption and integration 1 involved the standard integration of AI into 2 everyday processes, becoming an essential tool.
3 Phase 6: Evolution and learning 4 involved continuous learning and adaptation 5 as AI tools evolve.
6 e ve-month project, involving numerous stakeholders, resulted in a exible, 7 comprehensive 300-page manual for product innovation, detailing case studies 8 from dierent countries and the application of LLMs at every step of the process.
9 e global initiative demonstrated that AI-assisted humans outperform those @ without AI in generating successful innovations.
316 Case Study in Detail C David Boyle is an author with over 20 years of professional experience using D technology to develop audience intelligence and strategy capabilities in the E creative industries.
His work has inuenced the culture and economics of some F of the worlds most prestigious entertainment and luxury brands, including EMI G Music, HarperCollins Publishers, and the BBC.
H DAVID I : e work weve been doing with generative AI is about synthesizing P existing information and expanding on it, as well as uncovering gaps in our Q thinking.
Its about using generative AI to augment our capabilities and make us R more ecient and eective in our roles.
LLMs are ground-breaking in identifying S patterns and can generate innovative solutions when users are trained in how to T use them.
By adding proprietary data, oen derived from qualitative, ethnographic U research, we can gain even deeper, unique insights than those based on the LLMs V training data alone.
W In terms of synthesizing existing information for innovation, were using AI to X process vast amounts of data that would be impossible for a human to handle Y alone.
is includes market research, customer feedback, and internal performance ` metrics.
e AI identies patterns and trends we might miss, helping us make a more informed decisions.
Additionally, AIs predictive capabilities allow us to b simulate dierent scenarios and predict likely outcomes, helping us identify c potential issues before they become problems.
is proactive approach is a huge d advantage in todays fast-paced business environment.
317 e Were nding that product innovation is not unique in its process requirements.
f Were coming to the same conclusions in almost every area we look at, across g multiple processes from team management and planning to songwriting.
Every h single area we examine shows that the combination of human creativity and i generative AI is more potent than either humans or AI alone.
Technology can p enhance human creativity and analysis, but the human touch is crucial for q imagination, making counterintuitive connections, and initially asking the r right questions.
s For example, we recently ran a training session for a pharmaceutical company.
t eir brief was, Can we do a better job of coordinating, planning, marketing, u and strategizing with multiple partners using AI?
And can we avoid hiring v more people so we can stay lean?
My answer is absolutely yes because AI, w while a massive help, is just one piece of the puzzle.
Were still very much in the x driving seat.
It takes human insight to truly understand pain points and develop y meaningful solutions.
Moving forward, every single business process needs to incorporate AI at its heart.
Otherwise, you risk being slower, more expensive, and oering lower quality, with employees working harder and being less happy.
e innovation process is just one area where weve applied AI and decided that it wins.
However, we know thats true in the vast majority of business processes.
Specically, weve deployed AI to help supply chain teams predict product demand and ensure the right stock levels in the right places.
Weve also supported marketing teams using customer behavior data to deliver more relevant and engaging content.
318 The Business Challenge DAVID : A leading consumer goods company came to us to help them leverage AI around research.
e request was framed pretty much around, Can you write some prompts for us that will enable us to do product innovation eectively in an automated way?
but they didnt say the word automation.
I wasnt aligned to full automation.
Language models can, to a certain extent, be automated or semi-automated, but the essence of their function, and their real power, is as a tool to augment human capabilities.
ey enable us to perform tasks more eciently, more accurately, and with greater clarity.
But they need strong supervision.
e notion that they could entirely replace human input was something we strongly disagreed with from the outset.
So, our philosophy was very much rooted in being able to help the teams use language models in the innovation process.
Yet, throughout the whole project, there was this tension.
On one side, there were voices advocating for full automation, and on the other, our steadfast belief in helping people use these tools, not replacing them with these tools.
By the end of the project, I think they completely agreed, and theyve publicly acknowledged this saying that language models radically improve how people do their jobs.
ey also publicly stated that while AI is vital, focusing solely on technology and overlooking investment in people is a signicant error.
To foster innovation and growth, companies need to invest equally in humans and AI.
319 Approach DAVID : We deployed four out of six phases in the journey of AI adoption, with the client currently working through the last two: Figure 29.
1 Six phases of AI adoption (Source: Prompt.
mba) 320 As an organization progresses through the phases, they see greater and greater benets from AI: Figure 29.
2 Six phases of AI benefits.
(Source: Prompt.
mba) Phase 1: Skepticism and Hesitation !
DAVID " : First o, skepticism and hesitation.
Its incredibly benecial to maintain # a healthy level of skepticism.
If someone suggests a radical departure from a $ method thats been in place for 50 years, its natural to be wary.
It could easily % be just a sales pitch, and its probably best to ignore it.
eres a lot of hype in & this space, so skepticism is not only good, its necessary.
Phase 2: Initial Exposure and Surprise ( DAVID ) : However, when you see a real example of one of your brands generated 0 by AI right before your eyes, you start to think, Okay, somethings happening 1 here.
We demonstrated this early on in larger training sessions on broader 2 themes, and they acknowledged, Alright, this is real.
Somethings going on here.
3 321 4 So, when we came on board for innovation, they asked us to help them experiment 5 with how it could work.
is led to real-world use cases.
We tried it with more 6 brands and in more countries around the world.
We learned more about the 7 kind of problems it could solve and what good looked like in their eyes.
We 8 gathered more and more evidence, more and more belief that this approach was 9 so dierent, so much quicker, better, clearer, and more fun than the old process, @ that the client decided to invest more.
A We quickly achieved some truly remarkable results.
e rst notable result is B when you use a language model to accomplish something that an expert deems C to be exceptionally good.
You can reach this point fast when working with a key D decision-maker.
ats what I love about working with CMOs or CEOs, when E they say, Wow, this is very impressive.
You can then swily overcome that F initial resistance.
G But what we demonstrated was that in 45 minutes of careful, thoughtful work, H you could come up with a new product innovation, which was really, really good.
I And there was no way to do that in the old world.
Phase 3: Experimentation and Trial Q DAVID R : is phase involved small-scale experimentation to understand the AIs S capabilities and how it ts into existing workows.
It involved the evaluation of T a multitude of real-world case studies involving actual innovation teams from U across the globe.
ese teams were working on a diverse range of products, V both food and non-food.
ese case studies provided valuable insights into the W workings of teams in rural countries worldwide, who were still adhering to X ingrained methods of innovation.
Y Sometimes, they were looking to enhance an existing brand, reposition it, and ` relaunch it in the market, or aiming to introduce new products.
Regardless a of their objectives, these case studies oered a glimpse into their processes, b their challenges, and their unique approaches to innovation.
is wealth of c real-world examples served to enrich the project, providing tangible, practical d context to our theoretical understanding of how language models can aid in the e innovation process.
322 f e traditional innovation approach is a lengthy and comprehensive process.
g is becomes more complex in a global company.
It involves consumer research, h various stages of development, and then distilling that research through a i series of workshops.
is process takes on many forms and templates, with key p milestones and meetings along the way.
Essentially, its a process devoid of AI, q relying instead on market research, brainstorming innovation trends, and a great r deal of creative writing based on these elements.
s What we ended up doing was collaborating with real teams worldwide, who t were accustomed to the old way, and assisting them in transitioning to the new, u AI-supported way.
In the process, we were dening what this new way entailed.
v In our exploration, we conducted dozens of case study exercises, developed in w partnership with the business.
We discovered that out of a total of 150 prompts x we developed, around 15 stood out as particularly useful.
However, these prompts y require personalization to the specic project, meaning you cant just apply them blindly you still have to engage your intellect.
One thing weve done with the prompts is to be explicit about what we want and the format we want it in.
e clearer you are in the prompt about your requirements, the clearer the responses.
is approach can lead to immediate product concepts.
I believe its incredibly crucial that the human working with AI gets to view the prompt.
is is the challenge I have with custom-built interfaces I cant view the prompts.
If I read someones custom-generated meeting summarization but cant view the prompt, I cant easily work out what it is doing (and not doing).
Is it seeking insights or nuggets or catchy phrases or bold phrases or timid phrases or action phrases?
Is it seeking specic actions or just insights?
ese are all aspects that I might care about or want to modify.
I genuinely believe concealing prompts is an error.
We tested whether we could go straight to creating a solution or inventing a product in a single step and without feeding any background knowledge into the language model.
e answer is that its possible, but the results are far from 323 excellent, and a long way short of outstanding.
e idea of automating the process is still elusive.
Jumping to a new product innovation in a single prompt does get you lots of thought starters, but this way its challenging to pinpoint where the responses go wrong and how to x them.
Essentially, our conclusion is that for any reasonably sophisticated requirement, you need to follow some kind of multi-step process when using AI.
You cant just leap to the answer.
You dont have to go through the entire process, but you should certainly follow some kind of procedure rather than jump straight to an answer in a single prompt.
ats a signicant lesson.
Phase 4: Realizing Practical Applications DAVID : Phase 4 involved enhancing the innovation process to realize tangible outcomes and benets.
is phase was designed to ensure that the integration of AI into our processes was not just theoretical, but also practical with measurable outcomes.
e steps were meticulously planned and executed, keeping in mind the ultimate goal of enhancing the companys innovation capabilities and success rate.
In this approach, we concentrated on four key skill areas essential for leveraging LLMs.
Over the past year, our training programs have been instrumental in helping individuals develop the foundational skills necessary for working eectively with any LLM.
We believe these skills are exactly what people need to harness the full potential of LLM technology.
e core of enhancing human capability lies in acquiring foundational skills.
Once these skills are acquired, the particular tools employed whether its Otter.
ai for summarization or Copilot for coding become less important, as these tools are bound to change over time.
However, the key is to understand their underlying operations.
Developing the ability to cra eective prompts, modify them, iterate, and manage data inputs is essential.
With these skills, you can adeptly navigate any large language model.
Essentially, our focus is on imparting these fundamental competencies.
324 Figure 29.
3 Critical key skill areas for LLM.
mba) I believe that any team needs to master how to use LLMs across all four areas.
Yes, people might use one or two, but they oen dont realize the existence of the other two.
So, these are four relatively comprehensive skills.
In this fourth phase, we followed the following specic steps.
Step a.
Clarity of desired outcome DAVID : e rst step is being very clear about what it is youre actually trying to achieve asking, What are my goals for this new product innovation?
What does good look like?
What does it have to satisfy in terms of business goals or consumer goals for this to be a success?
Applying the logic Einstein suggested about solving a problem, if I had an hour to solve a problem, Id spend 55 minutes working out what the problem was and 5 minutes solving it.
It is the same with language models.
So, get to work on what problem youre trying to solve rst of all, before even starting on solving the problem.
325 Step b.
Understanding consumer needs DAVID : e second step focuses on deeply understanding consumer needs eectively and then understanding what consumer segments have those needs.
en, what unmet needs may be in the category?
When starting to explore audience needs, if you have what we call prep materials to include, you can put them in here as part of your prompts.
Processing input materials that you already possess with AI is still a win.
You can process a signicantly larger number of documents and synthesize them more rapidly for the context of the product and the category youre working on.
If you lack that consumer research, thats not a problem.
You can extract useful consumer insights from the AIs training data, given that it has read a vast number of human reviews of products and services and possesses a deep understanding of underlying human needs.
erefore, theres another section of the client manual we produced that says, Dont have any inputs?
No worries, dont bother reading the chapter on processing inputs.
Read this chapter instead.
And it provides the types of prompts you can use to get the AI to provide you with useful human insights, audience segments, and so on.
So, its a very exible process with numerous dierent approaches.
is brings us on to the second LLM skill area of desktop research.
is is essentially leveraging the AIs training data and saying, Hey, help me nd insights, facts, unmet needs, or similar things.
But again, this applies equally to pharmaceuticals, like when you say, Help me understand the pharmaceutical and healthcare market in Israel.
So, desktop research is a universal skill.
326 Step c.
Innovating new products DAVID : e third step is formulating a product o the back of the outcomes of the initial phases, being clear about what unmet needs it serves and the reasons why people should be excited about that product.
en, write out the full concept in consumer-facing language.
is step requires content creation skills, bringing the segments to life, asking the AI, Can you narrate a story about this concept?
Can you enhance this audience prole?
Can you provide me with some scenarios to illustrate this concept?
Supplementing elements like these with good writing, style guidance, and inputting the pieces that youve developed from previous steps will create compelling concepts.
If you already have your product benefits, you can use AI to generate a comprehensive, persuasive set of reasons to believe.
You can explore dierent categories of reasons to believe such as safe and comfortable to bolder and riskier or more innovative reasons that push boundaries.
Using LLMs to augment creative thinking or strategic thinking skills is important, too.
So thats like saying, Alright, what product innovation might make sense here?
How should I position the product?
What plan might I devise to research this further?
Leveraging these skills, we rened our approach to articulate the product concept to consumers more eectively.
is was distilled into a succinct one-page template that encapsulates the products essence, using language that has been validated through early consumer testing.
By following the clients testing protocols, we established a clear benchmark for what constitutes a successful concept one that is likely to achieve high sales.
Concepts developed with the support of AI not only met but exceeded these benchmarks with signicant margins.
Further, AI-supported concepts were more likely to exceed the benchmarks than those developed by humans alone.
is strong performance, backed by solid evidence, garnered the full support and condence of the leadership team.
327 Note on stakeholders and technology stack DAVID : eres a whole range of dierent stakeholders involved through phases 1-4.
ere are the business people, who are more concerned about the projects objectives.
en there are the more insight and market research people, who are interested in obtaining the right audience insights.
And nally, there are the product innovation or marketing people who will ultimately have to champion this and then market it.
From a technology stack perspective, the company created their own frontend onto OpenAI APIs a RAG-plus model.
eres a trade-o between RAG and a well-dened prompting process like ours where you bring in the brand positioning documents yourself and bring your insight.
You could argue that RAG could probably do those things, but since it does them in a way thats opaque, you can never really be sure whether its properly incorporated in the right context for you.
So, you might as well just copy and paste what you need directly into the prompt.
A clever user, a deliberate user, should almost always pull that stu in themselves rather than rely on the untransparent and unproven benets of RAG.
Certainly, I never saw any evidence that RAG was benecial.
We never depended on it in any of the processes we wrote.
Phase 5: Adoption and Integration Our client is now engaged in the h phase, Adoption and Integration, which will be followed by the sixth phase, Evolution and Learning.
Weve conducted some training sessions, but its now up to them to carry it forward.
ere will inevitably be an evolution as new prompting techniques emerge.
ey could never have just jumped straight to phase 5.
ey had to go through phases 1, 2, 3, and 4 to get there.
We guided them through these phases.
It was a complex, messy project that evolved over time with shiing goals and targets, but we realized how crucial this was.
328 # Results and Impact DAVID : What started as assistance with AI ended with a total transformation of the innovation process.
We trained hundreds of people and guided individual teams and countries worldwide on real projects, and this is now how they innovate.
It was challenging work, primarily because the scope was continuously changing.
As we and they learned by doing, we realized how transformative this process is.
In the end, it was a journey of about ve months.
I think it could have been shorter, but there was a massive number of stakeholders to include in our journey, and the scope of the project evolved signicantly as we progressed.
It began with a simple request for prompts and culminated in a complete redesign of their innovation process.
If the brief had been to redesign the innovation process from the start, they probably wouldnt have approached a small consultancy like us and instead gone to a major rm like McKinsey.
Im surprised that we didnt end up with a more denitive process.
I think what we recognized both in the pre-AI and post-AI world is that every project is a little dierent and the dierent innovations require slightly dierent processes.
ere were instances when we began with piles of in-depth audience research, while at other times, we started with almost none.
Sometimes, we excelled at certain parts of the project, and sometimes, we skimmed over them to focus on other areas.
What we ended up developing was a highly exible and comprehensive process, encapsulated within a detailed 300-page manual that includes various examples.
Its designed to allow users to navigate through it at their own pace.
e impact on the company and its approach to product innovation has been signicant.
Its not just about the number of innovations, but also about their quality and success rate.
Its a game-changer for the company, heralding a new era of product innovation powered by AI.
329 Impacts included: Q R S A global initiative, with case studies in South America, Australia, Indonesia, T and many other countries.
U V W e company has adopted the new manual for how product innovation should X be done which theyre in the process of rolling out.
Y ` a We proved that a human working with AI can generate more innovations b that pass the benchmark score in consumer testing than a human working c without AI, and score more highly when doing so.
So, the company is getting d more products that qualify as hits in consumer testing, which means a higher e rate of product innovation success.
f g h We produced evidence that the partnership of AI and people is stronger i than AI alone, which underscores the value of further investment in people p who can empathize, delve deeper, and rene innovations that resonate on a q human level and elevate results.
r Key Learnings s t u AI-fueled creativity v : e combination of human ingenuity and AI is more w potent than AI alone.
It augments human potential, enhancing the analysis x and exploration of large datasets.
e human touch is crucial for asking the y right questions at the outset and having original thoughts and connections.
Synthesize information and uncover gaps :LLMs are used to synthesize existing information, process vast amounts of data, and uncover gaps in our thinking.
is helps identify patterns and trends in data, including market research, customer feedback, and internal performance metrics, that might be missed.
330 LLM skill development : e focus should be on assisting people in developing foundational skills to operate LLMs.
e potential of LLMs in pattern recognition and generating innovative solutions is maximized when users are trained in its application.
ere are four key skill areas to master: condensing information, desk research, content generation, and creative thinking.
AI adoption across six phases :e transformative journey of AI adoption requires active participation to fully understand and appreciate its impact.
e six phases are: 1) Skepticism and hesitation, 2) Exposure and realization, 3) Experimentation and trial, 4) Realizing practical applications with benet realization, 5) Adoption and integration, 6) Evolution and learning.
Change management initiatives :e following nine initiatives can accelerate the process: AI exploration sessions:Hands-on sessions for team members to explore tools.
Role-specic AI integration:Tailor tool use to specic roles.
New employee AI onboarding:Include tool training in the onboarding process.
" Internal AI tool development:Encourage the development of company- # specic tools.
$ % & AI success case studies:Share stories of successful implementations.
' ( ) Regular AI tech talks:Discussions on the latest developments.
0 1 2 Cross-functional AI collaboration:Encourage cross-departmental use 3 of tools.
4 5 6 AI mentorship circles:Pair AI-experienced employees with newcomers.
7 8 9 Tailored prompts for your organization:Customize prompts to t the @ organizational context.
331 $ B 30 C CASE STUDY D E Leveraging E E nterprise F D D ata for Customer G $ IN CONVERSATION WITH BEN HALL $ : Director of Group % Finance at maritime solutions provider V.
Group.
Prior % to % this, Ben was the Finance Director at Bupa, a leading global % healthcare specialist.
His extensive experience also includes % senior roles at various nancial services companies, and he % began his career at Ernst & Young.
V LinkedIn: W ben-thomas-hall 332 X Case Study in Summary Y ` a b Segment: B2B c d e Industry: Ship f management and marine services g h i Geography: Global with 60 oces worldwide, including head oce in p London, UK q r s Value creation levers: e utility and investment return of a service portfolio t u v Time to impact: 12-18 months w x y Regulatory considerations: Low The Business Challenge ( V.
Group wanted a ( coherent understanding of customer protability, which was ( compromised due to fragmented data, disconnected systems, and incomplete ( information.
Furthermore, there was an over-reliance on compiling data in Excel ( to try to understand the business.
is approach was not providing reliable and ( actionable insights, so they needed a more integrated solution.
The Response ( e companys data management journey began with the development of a clear ( vision and roadmap and the ) engagement of business stakeholders.
e company ) was leveraging data for ship operations but needed to focus on the internal use ) of information for better company management.
333 ) e work was done in three phases: ) Phase 1: Developing a clear vision and roadmap, and engaging business ) stakeholders ) .
is ) phase shied focus from ongoing data manipulation to ) laying out a vision, ensuring buy-in from key stakeholders.
e company culture, ) previously centered on ship operations, began to appreciate the internal use of 0 information for better company management.
e project was rethought to 0 focus on the rule rather than the exceptions, which led to an eective revenue 0 and cost allocation approach.
0 Phase 2: Implementing data management and incremental improvement 0 .
is 0 phase prioritized data capture and management, with an emphasis on automation 0 and alignment of data across systems to reduce manual eort and streamline 0 processes.
is involved identifying bottlenecks, seeking alternative approaches, 0 and making incremental improvements.
0 Phase 3: Maturing and scaling 1 .
is phase evolved the data collation processes 1 with the use of a business intelligence tool, predictive work, and dashboard 1 provision.
It set up the company to apply AI prediction to internal data in the 1 future.
e business will leverage the one data platform approach for self-service 1 analysis and reporting.
334 Case Study in Detail 1 Ben Hall is Director 1 of Group Finance for V.
His role is focused on measuring, 1 reporting, and inuencing the nancial performance of the organization, as well 2 as providing a projection of performance.
Group is a large-scale operation with a wide portfolio of complementary services.
2 e group employs just under 3,000 onshore sta and has an annual revenue of 2 around $700 million.
It provides technical management, an array of services, and 2 digital solutions for the running of large maritime vessels on behalf of owners.
It 2 encompasses manning services worldwide, including a pool of 45,000 seafarers, 2 with 25,000 on board ships around the world at any given time.
As the group 2 doesnt own the ships, its a capital-light and very people-reliant organization.
2 ere are many sub-businesses within the core oerings, making it a one-stop 2 shop for a vessel owner.
It provides training for seafarers and oers a range of 3 operational services, such as repairs, maintenance, procurement, insurance, 3 travel, and catering.
2 The Business Challenge 3 BEN 3 : My roles 3 within this and previous organizations have been very focused 3 on performance management where youre looking underneath the numbers 3 and the nancial outcome to what the drivers of the business are.
To really 3 understand the drivers, you have to take an interest in understanding the product 3 and operations, whether thats working in an investment bank, an insurance 4 company, or a maritime services provider.
4 You then realize that prot is just the end outcome.
You have to take a step 4 back and ask, What are you going to measure and track and predict in the 4 organization?
Ensure youre predicting and measuring the activity the root 4 cause of the outcomes not the outcome itself.
335 4 You nd yourself tapping into data from all parts, people, and systems in the 4 organization.
You very quickly realize that in large organizations there can be an 4 industry of people who are consistently engaged in the task of interfacing with 4 disparate systems, repopulating incomplete information, and then ultimately 4 smashing it together in Excel, for example, to try and understand the business.
5 When I was brought into V.
Group, I was tasked to look at performance measurement 5 using nancial and 5 other pieces of data, with a focus on customer protability.
S Context-dependent issues 5 Dominant external focus 5 BEN 5 : e companys 5 strong customer focus with respect to data usage deected 5 focus away from internal performance metrics and management.
is le a gap 5 in understanding protability across dierent customer segments.
When I joined 6 V.
Group, owners and management would ask for information to track performance 6 that they assumed was readily available.
However, performance measurement 6 relied upon nancial systems structured to support external nancial reporting 6 only.
Management information had taken a back seat.
6 6 BEN 6 : New company owners and management recognized that capture of the 6 nancial outcomes was focused heavily on individual legal entities.
For example, 6 the company did not have a ready response to key questions such as How much 6 does the company earn from a tanker versus container versus leisure vessel?
7 Service lines couldnt measure their impact beyond an approximation, let alone 7 look across the cross-sell protability of a customer.
7 7 BEN 7 : Consultants had already been brought in to build a model for customer 7 protability, but the lack of clear vision, direction, and management ownership 7 meant their eorts were not progressing as expected.
Without internal buy-in, the 7 task had become absorbed in cleansing and manipulating data.
ere was a lot 336 7 of data and multiple systems that were disconnected and not managed in a way 7 that allowed easy collation into one centralized view.
Frankly, the consultants 8 were very frustrated by the companys lack 8 of support.
Approach 8 BEN: 8 I have heard the term you cant boil the ocean thrown at me when it 8 comes to talking about data 8 in the company.
I realized that I was trying to lay 8 out a vision and that it felt challenging in an environment where data quality 8 and completeness were not a focus.
So, of course, that vision needs to translate 8 into a plan containing manageable phases, actions, and deliverables.
9 A three-phase approach was taken.
e phases are not strictly linear and may 9 overlap or be revisited as the project progresses as its still ongoing, with a focus 9 on automating data capture and management as much as possible.
Phase 1: Developing a clear vision and roadmap, and engaging business stakeholders 9 BEN 9 : You need to 9 have 9 conviction.
In any role in any company, theres a lot 9 going on and there are lots of competing priorities.
When trying to develop @ something that you know is the right thing for the future of the organization, @ the company may be ghting res daily, but you need to nd a way to keep the @ momentum going.
@ First of all, there had to be a clearer picture of what we were trying to achieve.
e @ eorts to that point had been channeled into data manipulation versus taking @ a step back and laying out the vision.
Without a clear vision, you dont get the @ appropriate buy-in from key stakeholders, including operating management.
@ Taking the time to think through the direction and to articulate it properly to @ the right people was crucial.
@ Even if you are very IT-reliant, you need business sponsors.
Perhaps the company A doesnt have the skill set outside of IT, or in some cases, the right team design A to work with this sort of program.
My advice is to nd ambassadors who can 337 A see the vision and are fully bought in to drive it, keep eorts on track, and get A management on board.
A It sounds obvious, but when setting out to build a usable set of data to provide A answers, it is helpful to understand the most relevant questions.
We spent time A thinking through business use cases, and I asked what was important to senior A stakeholders to steer the shape of the data we were developing and how we could A apply it.
A I encouraged our consultants to steer eorts toward surfacing the data and B exposing the project: Lets look at this in the 80/20 space.
Rather than focusing B on the exceptions, lets focus on the rule.
We realized that we got to a point B where we had good revenue allocation, even if it was not yet automated.
But the B allocation of cost was proving heavily manual and dierentiated across services, B while also blurred by accounting practices and system classications.
Group does not have a uniform product, so cannot apply a simple or unique cost B allocation.
We have many dierentiated customers and services, and they require B a dierent level of attention, level of service, and eort, and can have entirely B dierent business models.
Keeping materiality in mind, we had to look at each B of those dierent service lines and seek out the simplest and most appropriate C cost allocation approach with the available drivers.
C When youre dealing with a decentralized and widespread environment, you C may not be seeking 100% accuracy all the time.
We aimed to be directionally C correct and be about guidance rather than a perfect solution.
Its been quite a C long road of working with the business leaders, their nance teams, business C partners, and others to the point where they can see the opportunity in the data C and the reason for it.
C is phase had involved establishing a clear vision, setting a timeline, and working C with consultants.
We named the project e Pod (Protability Optimization C Data), and over time the acronym D for D the data has become a noun, referenced D by users across the business.
e name seemed to soen the nance-centric D connotation of customer protability.
338 D Phase 2: Implementing data management and incremental E improvement D BEN D : is phase moved D the process into the bigger picture of data capture and D data management.
Extensive manual eort including downloading and data E manipulation isnt sustainable when you target regular and timely information.
E An alternative approach was needed.
Over time, we achieved automated data E retrieval and captured the mapping and alignment of this data across systems E as much as possible.
E We progress by continually checking in with practical questions: What part E of the process is still taking time?
Why are we held up again this month?
Now E lets look at this piece.
How do we make that smoother?
And you improve E incrementally.
is takes patience.
E Again, a very high priority was building ambassadors in the business.
Getting E the information out there very early on earned an appreciation of what was being F produced, which then allowed us the resources, or at least the patience from the F organization, to start improving the process and making it more uid and ecient.
F Attributing revenue to a customer by following the invoicing is straightforward.
F However, the eort was in extracting that particular data from dierent systems F and automating that data capture without having to run around and go into every F system, every month, and manually download it.
We now have a mechanism F for extracting data from key systems or key modules within the systems on the F revenue side.
F However, on the cost side, the process can be more intensive, particularly when F you are trying to allocate people and costs.
is phase was about dening the G cost categories and how to size that cost, dening the allocation key and how G you capture that allocation key.
At this point, I have found that the secret to G success is simplicity not complexity, but thats not as easy as it sounds.
A business G leader will rarely accept being measured on an opaque, black box calculation, so G breakthrough can occur through simple but appropriate allocation keys, such G as headcount.
339 G Having developed a single data platform, the company signicantly evolved the G infrastructure for data management across systems, which will be leveraged for G all ongoing data applications, including customer protability.
Currently, data G is extracted into Excel or Power BI for self-service analytics, visualization, and H reporting; however, we are excited H about future improvements.
Phase 3: Maturing and scaling H BEN H : When the data H was mature enough, we created simple dashboards and H gave them to the business leaders so they could see the information live and drill H down into details themselves.
H It started with hands-on access but moved on to scorecards, performance H management, and internal measurement.
We now monitor the businesses not I based on their business line but based on their customer remit.
is places I accountability with the customer relationship owner and breaks down silos I between functions that cross-sell to those customers, something that many I companies struggle with.
I e company does apply AI prediction to support the performance of customer I assets, but not for internal data, although its denitely where were heading now I that weve taken a wider view of multi-system data management.
Currently, our I customer protability has surfaced with the provision of dashboards and some I element of drill-through and source data that can be accessed by analysts directly.
I We have migrated toward Power BI as a universal tool.
is gives us an aligned P way of self-service analyzing, reporting, and P creating reports for sharing and P monitoring across the organization.
Results and Impact P BEN P : e executive team P and company owners found the customer protability P model gave them an invaluable new perspective.
It allowed them to view the P companys nancial performance in a way that points to the operational source.
P e company changed the way it looked at, presented, and modeled itself.
Instead Q of focusing on business lines, there was a shi to customers and vessels.
is 340 Q gave us better alignment of performance to market opportunity.
We now model Q our company and plan based on the customer type, rather than the business line Q rst, which is what we did previously.
Q To bring this to life, you might consider the market opportunity for the tanker Q market, which has dierent dynamics to, for example, container ships.
ey Q operate with dierent supply and demand cycles, so by being able to view the Q business by customer and by vessel, we instantly started to ask, How does that Q map against the external environment?
How does that map against our view Q of the future environment?
We now critique our nancial forecasts with this R market lens.
R In business operations, you want the application of this information to be a R little bit dierent, more focused on the customer, the product oering, the R pricing, and so on.
In this interaction, you may face denial as data may expose R weaknesses in the commerciality of a customer relationship.
But, critically, it R exposes opportunities.
R I advocate getting information out there, in the hands of the users, as soon as R possible.
By building early advocacy, people start caring and it buys support R to invest time and eort into improving the product.
It also exposes early R weaknesses, so you can course correct.
Our allocation process has automation S coded in; however, there are residual elements of Excel and manual reliance.
We S are pushing for a better, more systematic way of doing this.
I would recommend S seeking advice on data capture, management, and tooling from the start, rather S than trying to retrot.
S We have been on this journey for years, but thats not to say we didnt have S anything to apply throughout that journey we absolutely did.
Were two or S three years into having a robust, timely, monthly dataset.
And before that, we S probably had a year or two where we were quarterly.
Even prior to that, we were S seeing big-picture information not previously available.
S Company-wide manual processes consume more resources than it seems on T the surface.
By streamlining processes and getting to the point where theyre T predominantly automated, we have data for application in performance measurement 341 T intra-month.
Having T timely, actionable, and fact-based information thats T where you start getting value.
T Impact included: F G H e customer protability model provided the executive team and business I management with a new perspective and detailed understanding of the P companys performance.
Q R S e business is now analyzed through both customer and vessel perspectives, T allowing clearer mapping of performance and future projections.
U V W is data is widely applied for internal decision-making, holistic performance X management, and to underpin a strategic focus on the quality of earnings.
Y ` a Data collation processes are continually evolving, with plans to migrate to b more advanced systems and tools.
c d e e company applies AI prediction to customer vessel data, with plans to f extend this to internal data.
g h i Automation and p streamlined processes have resulted in timely performance q measurement, adding value to the business.
r Key Learnings s t u Maintain focus with a roadmap v : Its crucial to have a clear vision of what youre w trying to achieve with a well-dened AI roadmap and be able to articulate it x to the right people.
Quantify the problem to solve and the gap between the y current state and the proposed solution.
Ensure the problem is manageable in scope for resolution.
Keep the momentum going on your project, even when there are competing priorities.
Ask the right questions : To extract the most meaningful output from the dataset, you need to ask the right questions.
Without the right questions, the dataset will just be another breakdown of results.
Formulating thoughtful questions upfront guides the analysis and transforms the data into actionable intelligence.
342 e goal isnt only nancial quick wins, but to understand the drivers of the business and use this to improve performance and decision-making.
Business sponsorship : You need key stakeholders outside of IT who can see the vision and are fully bought in to drive eorts, keep them on track, and get management on board.
Sharing information early in the process fosters appreciation for the project, enabling resource allocation and patience for process renement.
Consider the 80/20 rule : To get something out there, its okay to release a partial end product.
When other people start caring about it, you buy the headroom to x things that couldnt be xed during the initial build.
Build for scalability : To avoid having to retrot your architecture and tooling later, seek advice on the best ways to build your model and the right tools to use at the start.
is involves lining up the systems for data capture and manipulation, and the tool to surface it more productively.
Be patient : Understand that building a robust, timely, monthly dataset is an iterative process.
You need to have patience as you build up a credible history.
343 a 31 CASE STUDY M M inimizing Customer !
Churn with AI AI b IN CONVERSATION WITH MANU KUMAR: b Chief Data b and b AI Ocer, with over a decade of experience in the advanced b analytics and AI space.
His expertise spans senior leadership b roles in technology, luxury, eCommerce, and insurance sectors b across three continents.
) LinkedIn: 0 manuakumar M M INIMIZING CU s S TOMER CHURN WITH AI AI 344 1 Case Study in Summary 2 3 4 5 Segment: B2C 6 7 8 Industry: Insurance 9 @ A Geography: Europe B C D Value E creation levers: Growth and retention F G H Time to impact: 12-18 months I P Q Regulatory considerations: High R The Business Challenge e A large, multinational e health insurance company with revenue in the low double- e digit billions of dollars and operating in a highly regulated industry was suering e from high churn rates across its major countries of operation, implying losses e in the current year and future revenues.
is intensied pressure on customer e acquisition costs as well as ineciencies in targeting marketing spend.
e e company was held back by a lack of data and AI solution culture and expertise f and high switching costs from a legacy solution that was deeply integrated f into actuarial processes like pricing and risk modeling.
Any changes required f regulatory and stakeholder f approval.
f e challenge was: e f g Develop an eective solution to reduce churn.
h i p Prove the value of investments in AI capabilities and deliver a strong, quick ROI.
M M INIMIZING CU s S TOMER CHURN WITH AI AI 345 q The Response g Manu was a key member of a new internal team called Customer Lab, created g to overcome cultural g resistance and build transformative capability to help the g insurer modernize its processes.
g e team focused on developing an AI-based churn prediction model using an g expanded set of 40+ inputs from the insurers existing data to identify patterns g to predict future churn.
ese included potential drivers across categories such g as product or policy factors (for example, premium increases, discounts, free h cover duration), customer prole (age, tenure, and so on), claim patterns and h complaints (number of claims, payment delays, and more), as well as signals h related to adding dependents to an insurance policy (potentially making certain h pricing unattractive for a policyholder).
ey trialed a variety of AI approaches h and nally settled on a Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) model a deep h neural h network that can use time series information of events to make predictions.
h e work was done in three phases: h Phase 1: Discovery and building the team h .
is phase focused on understanding i the core i business challenge and current approach and assembling a new team i versed in technologies to be implemented in the solution.
i Phase 2: Developing a minimum viable product (MVP) i .
is phase involved i a 12-week sprint to construct a data-driven MVP to predict customer churn, i addressing shortcomings of the existing model.
i Phase 3: Driving insights, operationalization, and adoption i .
is phase identied i key churn drivers and decision matrices and devised customer retention strategies.
p It enhanced predictive performance accuracy, addressed risk concerns, and p promoted widespread adoption.
M M INIMIZING CU s S TOMER CHURN WITH AI AI 346 p is overall approach signicantly improved the performance of the model and p the ability of the company to proactively identify customers at risk of leaving the p business.
e model could be applied to 95% of those who had been customers p for over a year and p could accurately identify 80% of customers who were likely p to churn in the 12 months going forward.
Case Study in Detail q Manu is currently q the Chief Data Ocer at Richemont Groups YNAP group q (Net-a-Porter, YOOX, Mr Porter, and theoutnet.
com), focusing on building q AI solutions for brands and eCommerce.
Previously, he held senior leadership q positions in data and AI at an insurance business.
Over the past ten years, Manu q has focused on data and AI.
Prior to this, he worked in product technology q roles at companies including Microso, Vodafone, and various startups across q three continents.
q Manu says his diverse background gives him signicant advantages.
It leads q him to take a startup-like approach, where, despite the size of the company, r he enjoys getting hands-on, developing the strategy, and then coding alongside r teams.
In addition, he applies his experience from a variety of industries to r relevant situations; for example, his Masters in Operations Research from r Berkeley provided foundational knowledge in techniques like neural networks, r which played a valuable role in predicting customer churn in this case study.
% The Business Challenge r e insurer r operating in a highly regulated industry was experiencing an r expensive customer churn problem with low double-digit churn rates in its scale r markets.
is impeded revenue trajectory challenged realizing customer value s against acquisition cost and exerted further pressure on the marketing and sales M M INIMIZING CU s S TOMER CHURN WITH AI AI 347 s organizations.
At the time, there was no scalable mechanism in place to proactively s identify high-risk customers likely to churn and take steps to prevent this.
3 Context-dependent issues 4 5 6 Lack of solution innovation culture and expertise 7 : e business, aware of 8 data and AI 9 advances, was seeking to modernize.
Until that point, it had been @ good at sourcing externally built solutions and expertise via advisors but had A not yet developed a strong internal innovation culture nor the ability to build B tailored solutions for key strategic problems.
At this relatively greeneld stage C of its analytics and AI capabilities, the company set up a new customer lab D team to accelerate its capabilities and hired functional specialists like Manu E to prove value.
F G H High switching costs I : e businesss legacy solution was deeply integrated P into core actuarial processes such as pricing, risk modeling, and regulatory Q reporting.
ere were signicant switching costs as it needed approval not R only by regulators but also from a wide range of stakeholders, including S strategy, legal, compliance, actuarial modeling, and pricing.
T Approach u MANU u : When u starting a project, I invariably draw on several frameworks, and u in this instance referenced u Competing on Analytics v and v Analytics at Work v by v omas Davenport and Jeanne Harris.
While it might not be entirely relevant v to new technologies, Davenport and Harriss DELTA model oers a valuable v framework for understanding and implementing successful analytics programs.
v e DELTA Plus Model consists of seven key elements: g h i Data: Quality, integration, and governance of data p q r Enterprise orientation: Building an analytical culture and adopting s enterprise-wide analytics M M INIMIZING CU s S TOMER CHURN WITH AI AI 348 t u v Leadership: Strong executive support for analytics w x y Targets: Applying analytics to the right business areas Analysts: Hiring and managing analysts eectively Tech stack: Having a tech stack that is as cloud-forward as possible Analytical techniques: Using appropriate methodologies for data analysis x I have used this framework across dierent industries from telco to healthcare and y eCommerce.
ese factors are crucial in planning and implementing successful y data science projects.
With y this in place, I focus on four key areas, based on my y personal experience: Data capability assessment: Conduct a thorough and honest evaluation of your internal and external data capabilities.
Modernizing models and tools: is is oen the low-hanging fruit.
By updating your models and tools, you can tap into opportunities that might currently be overlooked.
Change management and transformation: Purchasing soware and using algorithms are important but its crucial to ensure your team understands the benets of these tools, how to use them, and the improvements they can bring to their work.
is oen involves a signicant change management eort.
Talent: It might be hard to nd but strong data science and data engineering talent is critical, as is having them in an integrated team.
Ive faced issues when data engineering was not part of the data science team.
To deploy multiple models at multiple dierent points, a very strong data engineering team is absolutely key.
M M INIMIZING CU s S TOMER CHURN WITH AI AI 349 Phase 1: Discovery and building the team MANU : I began by asking, Whats the biggest business problem you have?
e resounding response was customer attrition.
Acquiring new customers to replace your old ones is very challenging, so this gave me something meaningful to focus on.
e rst thing I did was go on a discovery mission to gure out how the business was currently addressing this problem.
Rather than reinventing the wheel, this meant I could identify a starting point from which we could build.
It turned out that the actuarial team had a basic statistical solution in place as part of a wider actuarial soware suite that created their prediction tables and pricing structures as well as tracking money in from premiums and out for claims.
is was over a decade old and suered from the impact of model and data dri.
In addition, it depended on a dated, small data statistical approach that could not leverage the rich signals and datasets available to the company.
e key problem with this solution was that it had low overall accuracy due to two things.
Firstly, the model was designed around a narrow set of inputs, using only a few predictor variables (age, gender, postcode, product type, claims, and premiums).
It lacked the sophistication to leverage the insurers richer customer and claims dataset.
Secondly, the simplistic modeling approach of the legacy solution meant it fell short of the business needs.
e statistical, multivariate regression model it used didnt consider the valuable time element of the customers journey.
Some regression-based approaches can be useful, but in this instance, it was designed more as a simple risk modeling tool and not a purpose-built churn prediction tool that could provide predictive insights into specic time horizons.
So, the business couldnt use it to proactively mitigate churn risk.
M M INIMIZING CU s S TOMER CHURN WITH AI AI 350 In addition to low accuracy, the legacy solution was deeply integrated into existing actuarial processes such as pricing, risk modeling, and regulatory reporting.
So, you can imagine the amount of resistance to anything new upsetting the apple cart because here I was walking in with a data science background, they thought, How can he gure out our risks and exposure better than us?
erefore, there had to be a high level of trust in a new solution.
And there were signicant switching costs to consider too it would not only need approval from regulators but also from a wide range of stakeholders, including strategy, legal, compliance, actuarial modeling, and pricing.
We lacked data scientists, so I hired externally to bring in the necessary expertise with professionals who understood the technologies we needed to implement.
ey evaluated our existing algorithms, identied areas for improvement, and upgraded them to enhance performance.
X Phase 2: Developing a minimum viable product (MVP) MANU : We focused on developing a data-driven mechanism to predict churn and address key shortcomings of the existing model.
I took in all the underlying datasets and created a new AI-driven system.
is system used Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks, which are precursors to ChatGPT.
LSTM networks are widely used in deep learning and excel at capturing long-term dependencies, making them ideal for sequence prediction tasks.
ey can understand and predict patterns in sequential data like time series, text, and speech.
We outlined a 12-week approach to build and deliver an MVP (minimum viable product) that would demonstrate worth, gain traction, and start to earn trust.
M M INIMIZING CU s S TOMER CHURN WITH AI AI 351 Figure 31.
1 Twelve-week MVP process Exploring datasets and inputs : As a rst step, we undertook a scan of potential datasets that would help us understand the customers experience and likelihood of churn.
Instead of the initial list of limited variables, we expanded the dataset to include more than 40 variables, a volume the previous in-house system couldnt manage, with more signals than before.
e original soware, which had not been updated in a decade, exhibited signicant data and model dri.
is dri is a common issue in machine learning models where the statistical properties of the target variable, which the model is trying to predict, change over time in unforeseen ways.
is can lead to a decrease in model accuracy.
e following table shows some of the categories we worked across.
is richer dataset helped to signicantly improve the model and provided extensive insights into the business.
Given the sensitive nature of the data, all datasets underwent signicant review and detailed processes, with the oversight of risk and regulatory teams to remove Personally Identiable Information (PII) and maintain high levels of security.
M M INIMIZING CU s S TOMER CHURN WITH AI AI 352 POLICY OR PRODUCT FACTORS CUSTOMER PROFILE FACTORS DEPENDENT RELATED FACTORS CLAIM AND COMPLAINT FACTORS TIME SERIES Number of products sold to customer Current premiums and excess Historical premium changes Levels of discounting Free premium periods timeframe Next payment timeframe Age Gender Premium relative to other customers (deciles) Location (address) Household status Number of dependents (partners, children, and so on) Claims made by dependents Claims made by dependents Claims made by dependents Invoices and items generated Amount claimed Details of claims Number of claims Timeframe of claims processing Number of days in payments delay Number of customer experience issues (for example, complaints) Time-stamp of claims and customer support Sequence Table 31.
1 Categories integrated to enrich the dataset M M INIMIZING CU s S TOMER CHURN WITH AI AI 353 Preparation: validating hypotheses and creating insights : Building a clean, consolidated dataset gave us access to key insights for the business to interrogate the data and drive proactive retention measures.
is initial approach got the dataset into the hands of the business early and informed dashboards that a variety of teams could access and use to understand customers and behaviors.
Examples of the analytics include: Volume of total customers and churners by business line, such as personal versus company insurance schemes.
Mapping churners and customers to overall premiums.
Average customer tenure.
Where in the journey stage customers churn.
We found that 60%+ of applicants !
lapsed at the time of policy renewal, and 50%+ contribute 80% of premiums.
" # $ Compare the distribution of customers and average premiums against churn % rates.
is analysis helps identify patterns or trends, such as whether higher & premiums lead to higher rates or the opposite, or if certain groups of customers ' are more likely to churn than others.
It serves to make strategic decisions ( about ) pricing and customer retention.
Developing churn prediction models : We developed a sample of data to train our models.
We used a simple funnel imager to help the business understand the chosen population.
M M INIMIZING CU s S TOMER CHURN WITH AI AI 354 Evaluating modeling techniques for churn prediction With deep learning, I could go much further.
We evaluated a number of AI techniques to model churn prediction.
ese included the Cox proportional hazards survival model, Generalized Linear Models (GLMs), and gradient boosting.
APPROACH DESCRIPTION ADVANTAGES DISADVANTAGES Cox Proportional Hazards Survival Analysis Developed by David Cox in 1972, this is a regression model.
This model is particularly both quantitative predictor variables and categorical variables.
Often used in churn prediction to predict time until an event (a lapse, in this instance) occurs.
Commonly used in medical Capable of handling data time intervals analysis.
Assumes that the risk (hazard) remains constant is not the case in forecasting lapses.
Results can be complex for non- technical users to interpret.
M M INIMIZING CU s S TOMER CHURN WITH AI AI 355 APPROACH DESCRIPTION ADVANTAGES DISADVANTAGES Generalized Linear Models (GLMs) Developed by John Nelder and Robert Wedderburn as statistical models, including linear regression, logistic regression, and Poisson extension of ordinary linear Can handle both quantitative and categorical predictor variables, for example, count, binary outcomes, or rates.
Used for applications such as predictive maintenance, insurance conversion modeling.
Ability to measure variables on churn.
to handle of data, including binary, count, and continuous outcomes.
Results are easier to interpret.
Presumes a linear relationship case in predicting lapses.
Prone to in capturing complex, non- linear relationships in data.
M M INIMIZING CU s S TOMER CHURN WITH AI AI 356 APPROACH DESCRIPTION ADVANTAGES DISADVANTAGES Gradient Boosting Developed by several contributors: Leo Breiman, Jerome H.
Jonathan Baxter, and Marcus Frean.
Machine learning technique used for regression and Creates a prediction model in the form of an ensemble models, typically simple decision trees.
These models are added sequentially, each one made by summing up the based on its performance.
prediction problems and risk modeling.
Ability to learn about relationship independent variables on the dependent ones.
Churn datasets are imbalanced by default (most customers deal the dataset retained customers.
Was prone !
Challenging to !
use for learning !
lifetime behaviors !
and balancing !
" over time.
" Can be computa " - " tionally " " intensive.
M M INIMIZING CU s S TOMER CHURN WITH AI AI 357 " APPROACH " DESCRIPTION " ADVANTAGES " DISADVANTAGES # # # LSTM (Long # # Short-Term # # Memory) # # # that excels in learning from $ sequences of data.
$ Adept at applications $ involving time-series data.
$ $ sequential and $ time-based $ data and able $ to learn from $ both events $ % % making them % valuable for % complex churn % problems.
% Ability to % use rich % transactional % data at an % account level.
& Computationally & & resource-intensive.
& Complex to under & - & stand and & & explain in terms & & ' - ' ables ' ' to focus on and ' ' action to take.
' Table 31.
2 AI techniques evaluated for churn ' e LSTM model was our nal choice.
It oered us the advantage of identifying ' patterns not only from the events in the expanded set of variables but also ' from the timeline series.
is included factors such as the timing of the event, ( its frequency, and its sequence.
( Transitioning from one solution to another, particularly in the realm of time ( series analysis, can make a signicant dierence.
Using the most advanced time ( series solutions available at any given time can greatly enhance the accuracy and ( eciency of data analysis.
M M INIMIZING CU s S TOMER CHURN WITH AI AI 358 ( One of the key ( advantages ( of modern methods is the ability to perform feature ( engineering.
is process involves creating new input features for machine ( learning from existing variables, which can improve model performance.
) However, if you opt for a commodity solution that merely organizes your data ) in a certain way, using a few variables, you may miss out on the full potential of ) your data analysis.
is is especially true if you dont have the time to create ) a ) Business Analytics Solution (BAS) book a comprehensive document detailing ) your data analysis processes and ndings.
erefore, investing time in feature ) engineering and creating a BAS book can help you leverage the full potential of ) your data and yield more accurate and insightful results.
) To nd the optimal solution, I conducted thorough performance checks and model ) explanations.
I explained and likened this process to a Google search, where the 0 interaction between a company and its customers is through language.
Just as 0 you type a search word on Google and it predicts what you might be looking 0 for, businesses can use similar predictive models to anticipate a customers next 0 action, such as a churn event or a product upgrade/downgrade.
e most successful 0 companies have implemented this architecture for highly visible products.
0 e beauty of using LSTMs lies in their ability to capture and analyze temporal 0 patterns in data.
We used LSTMs to 0 calculate Customer Lifetime Value (CLTV) 0 and churn rates, creating cohorts based on these values.
is approach allows 0 us to factor in acquisition costs in a detailed manner.
1 We can examine each customer individually and decide on the most eective 1 intervention.
For instance, for a customer who is highly likely to churn but has 1 a high lifetime value, we might decide to have an insurance agent call them 1 directly.
is is an expensive intervention, so we would only use it for a small 1 list of customers.
is strategy ensures that resources are allocated eciently, 1 targeting customers who are most likely to bring value to the company in the 1 long run.
M M INIMIZING CU s S TOMER CHURN WITH AI AI 359 1 e CLTV model we developed was more advanced than any previous system.
By 1 using LSTMs, we were able to leverage past transaction data for feature engineering 1 and model development.
Of course, all data was anonymized in compliance 2 with the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR).
is 2 approach allowed 2 us to create distinct predictions for dierent cohorts, particularly regarding 2 their likely claims as a group.
e necessary data was readily available from past 2 claim submissions.
2 e importance of time series analysis in this context cannot be overstated.
It 2 allows us to layer events into a timeline, providing a more comprehensive view 2 of customer behavior.
2 e maturity of LSTMs played a crucial role in our success because they allowed 2 us to fully unlock the potential of our datasets.
e solution was tailor-made 3 for our needs, which 3 signicantly 3 enhanced its eectiveness.
By leveraging the 3 capabilities of LSTMs, we were able to extract valuable insights from our data 3 and create robust predictive models.
5 Phase 3: Driving insights, operationalization, and adoption 3 MANU 3 : Our analysis 3 provided 3 valuable 4 insights into churn drivers and potential 4 interventions for customer retention.
For instance, accounts with promotional 4 incentives exhibited a lower churn propensity.
4 In hindsight, getting a step change in predictive performance was the easy part 4 because there was a good response to the results.
However, the real challenge 4 lay in overcoming the perception of risk, explaining the analytics and benets 4 to the broader business, and fostering adoption.
4 I oen advise Chief Data Ocers that if the reports, tools, or decision engines 4 they create are not being used or implemented, then nothing they did matters.
4 Its not just about creating the system; its about making sure people are using it 5 and processes are updated.
M M INIMIZING CU s S TOMER CHURN WITH AI AI 360 5 We implemented several strategies to drive adoption: R S T Showing the value U : We emphasized the value of improved prediction accuracy V to the business, particularly in terms of customer retention through specic W interventions.
We quantied this value in terms of Return on Investment X (ROI), taking into account the cost of interventions and potential gains.
Y To provide a more tangible understanding of the potential benets and ` trade-os of dierent a customer b retention strategies, we c devised trade-o d matrices.
ese matrices demonstrated the viability of specic initiatives, e such as oering free cover, based on their adoption and retention percentages.
f is approach enabled us to eectively communicate the potential advantages g and compromises associated with each strategy.
h i p Translating q : We realized that there was a need to translate our work into r clearer and more understandable terms for people unfamiliar with AI and s bring the benets to life through analogies and live events.
t u v Explaining prediction w : People tend to think of prediction systems in binary x terms, as simply being accurate or not.
We spent considerable time explaining y the confusion matrix in detail false positives, false negatives, and so on and what the value of reducing false negatives would be for the business.
We used the analogy of COVID testing (topical at that time) and virus spread to explain the importance of precision to avoid false negatives.
A false negative in COVID testing meant you didnt pick someone who had the virus, and they went around spreading it, whereas a false positive might mean a person just got one more booster.
With this explainer, people really got the whole concept of false negative and positive scores, and how the former was potentially more serious.
Audience-based access : Not all information can be shared with everyone, so our approach to accessing data is to grant it based on privilege levels.
For instance, regulators and actuaries have access to more comprehensive information due to the nature of their roles.
is ensures that sensitive data is only accessible to those who need it for their specic functions, thereby maintaining data security and privacy.
M M INIMIZING CU s S TOMER CHURN WITH AI AI 361 Actuary copilot : To address the pushback from various teams who might have felt threatened by this technology, I explained how the AI-driven solution could augment actuaries, as an AI copilot would make them more capable rather than replacing them.
Because this one architecture could deliver better insights, it would help the teams price risk better and prevent the business from leaking value (such as leaking 1-2% fewer customers per year).
Plus, it could solve more problems by layering in customer lifetime value, to design campaigns, and so on.
Industry examples : By comparing the predictive nature of the architecture to how Google predicts search phrases, gave the teams reason to believe and build trust.
Showing how one of the worlds leading companies has adopted such a framework demonstrated how their business could forecast whether a customer might upgrade, downgrade, or discontinue a product or service.
: To drive change management, the team and I initiated live " events with lots of webinars, roadshows, presentations, and dierent Executive # Committee forums and so on to get people on board.
$ Results and Impact B MANU B : e implementation B of an AI-driven solution dramatically transformed B the business operations.
It achieved extensive coverage and applicability across the B customer base, signicantly outperforming the previous model and enhancing C revenue generation.
Moreover, it optimized internal processes, paving the way C for future technological advancements.
C Impacts included: 3 4 5 e AI solution covered over 95% of the business and was applicable to most 6 customers with a history exceeding one year.
7 8 9 It could accurately identify 80% of customers likely to churn in the @ forthcoming 12 months.
M M INIMIZING CU s S TOMER CHURN WITH AI AI 362 A B C An eightfold performance improvement over the previous regression-based D solution and yielded tens of millions in additional revenue over the period.
E F G e model streamlined multiple internal processes and enabled targeted, cost- H eective retention campaigns based on nely segmented churn risk scoring.
I P Q It unlocked additional use cases like predicting Customer Lifetime Value R (CLV) and personalized pricing based on risk.
S T U e MVPs success gained approval for full-scale adoption to the companys V largest market.
W X Y e project established foundational data pipelines and AI deployment ` processes for future initiatives.
a Key Learnings b c d Baseline technical capability e : Before introducing a new AI solution, assess the f critical business problem to solve as well as the current systems (architecture, g integration, performance, and scalability).
is helps benchmark progress and h identify opportunities, and risks.
Understand foundational tech components i to determine where to invest for risk mitigation.
An important aspect of p the assessment is to understand user workows and the industry-standard q technology that they rely on for critical processes.
With due consideration, r the business can integrate industry-standard solutions where appropriate.
s t u Opportunities for quick wins v : Oen, the initial outcome of a technical w assessment identies opportunities for quick wins.
Even in an organization x burdened with legacy systems and a suboptimal architecture, an AI solution y can work eectively with minimal integration.
Identify in-house gaps in capabilities : Assessing the capabilities of the internal team is also crucial at the start.
Rapidly augment capabilities through targeted hires and strategic partnerships with specialist rms.
M M INIMIZING CU s S TOMER CHURN WITH AI AI 363 Data expansion : Leveraging a broader set of data inputs can signicantly improve the accuracy of predictive models and provide a more comprehensive understanding of customer behavior and potential churn indicators.
Algorithm selection : e primary goal should be to solve the problem at hand, choosing and combining algorithms based on their suitability for the problem, not convenience.
Update select algorithms and tools to oer immediate improvements in the development of AI solutions.
Minimum Viable Product (MVP) : Hands-on rapid development of an MVP provides quick progress within a typical 12-week delivery timeline.
is includes bottom-up use case preparation, design and UI, build, UAT/QA, and deployment.
: Eectively explaining precision versus accuracy and associated costs enables informed trade-o discussions.
Developing trade- o matrices can provide a tangible understanding of the potential benets and trade-os of dierent customer retention strategies.
Buy-in from skilled employees : Its crucial to ensure the work is understandable to colleagues less familiar with AI.
Integrating the AI-driven solution as an augmentation to skilled employees for specic process steps can overcome resistance.
Progress can be slower than anticipated as it can take time to !
build trust and buy-in.
An iterative and user/customer-led approach that " integrates feedback is essential to the ongoing process.
# $ % Strategies for solution adoption & : Using various strategies, including analogies, ' other industry examples, and live events, can drive change management and ( ensure the successful adoption of the new solution into business workows.
) Setting up a separate team within the business to accelerate the solution by 0 building expertise and a change-oriented mindset can enable the core business 1 operations to continue uninterrupted.
M M INIMIZING CU s S TOMER CHURN WITH AI AI 364 2 3 4 Data security and access controls 5 : When working with sensitive data, 6 ensuring security 7 and compliance is vital, especially when handling Personally 8 Identiable Information (PII).
Implementing an audience-based access control 9 system can ensure only authorized individuals have access to sensitive data.
@ is ensures ongoing data security and privacy.
365 T B 32 C CASE STUDY D E E nhancing M M arketing E Strategies T T hrough the F Power of LL M M s T IN CONVERSATION WITH DAVID BOYLE T : Director at T advisory rm Audience Strategies, experienced U insights leader, U and co-author of the U PROMPT U book series on using language U models like ChatGPT to guide marketing and brand U U growth professionals.
W LinkedIn: X beglen 366 Y Case Study in Summary ` a b c Segment: B2C d e f Industry: Media and entertainment g h i Geography: Europe p q r Value s creation levers: Growth and retention t u v Time to impact: Less than 6 months w x y Regulatory considerations: Low The Business Challenge X A music events X company needed an audience strategy to promote a live event to X a broad fanbase for a famous DJ with a genre-spanning career of over 20 years.
X e challenge included: Identifying distinct target segments for the artist with such broad appeal.
Limited budget meant conventional audience analysis was not possible.
e expectation for automation without an understanding of the complexities involved.
Unclear directives and tight deadlines.
367 The Response Y In a proprietary ` approach, David leveraged ChatGPT, alongside his and the ` promoters extensive skills and experience, to formulate an audience strategy ` in approximately 20 hours.
is process would typically take 5-6 weeks using ` traditional methods.
` e work was done in three phases: ` Phase 1: Understanding the persons key dimensions of fame ` .
is phase developed ` a ` deep understanding of the artists key dimensions of fame and how they resonate ` with dierent audience segments.
ChatGPT was used to synthesize decades a of rich online press coverage and commentary into data points by identifying a implicit themes not explicitly stated in the texts.
Its a collaborative and highly a iterative process that leverages the strengths of AI while also requiring human a decision-making and expertise.
is phase dened audience segments a based on various factors, including their needs, lifestyle, interests, and behaviors.
a ChatGPT was used as a tool to understand audience motivations and behaviors, a solve complex problems, and empathize with the audience.
en, through a series a of prompts, proles were developed to describe the typical lifestyle attitudes, b behaviors, and interests of likely fans.
is process helped narrow down the b original 15 drivers to 7-8 core targetable audience clusters.
b Phase 3: Developing tailored positioning and strategy b .
ChatGPT was used to b develop needs, pain points, and ideas that align with the values of each group.
b is helped tailor marketing approaches to engage each fan group.
roughout b the process, human expertise was applied to rene prompts and curate viable b outputs.
is combined expertise b from both the promoter and the analyst ensured b practical and broad-focused strategy recommendations.
368 0 Case Study in Detail 1 c In an accomplished career c spanning over 20 years in marketing and insights, David c Boyle has held senior roles in prominent media and entertainment companies, c including BBC, HarperCollins Publishers, and EMI Music.
His leadership in c analytics and insights teams has enabled his clients to better understand their c audiences to optimize and deliver targeted content, experiences, and interactions c via marketing.
Currently, he works as an independent consultant and author, as c well as a speaker on leveraging audience intelligence for business growth.
d Davids core passion is for democratizing access to customer insights from data.
d In his professional experience, only the biggest projects get good treatment, in d terms of resources for analytics.
He aims to use advanced analytics and AI to d help organizations develop tools to provide richer insights for smaller projects d and artists.
Today, he applies his learnings from Fortune 500 companies to advise d small startups with limited budgets on how they can unlock the power of data d to drive better decision-making.
d While not a technical data scientist, Davids strong industry and strategy d experience has enabled him to develop a specialist skill set using Large Language d Models (LLMs) to uncover niche, exciting ideas.
He and his team have worked e extensively with LLMs (mainly GPT), and hes authored ve books for a variety e of industries, guiding them on how they can leverage this technology eectively.
R The Business Challenge e As one of the UKs largest music events promoters, the clients business orchestrates e an extensive array e of concerts, festivals, and club nights by identifying potential e talent among musicians and strategically pairing them with suitable venues.
e ey then handle every aspect of event production, marketing, and ticket sales e to deliver high-quality audience experiences and optimize tour protability.
369 e e company was organizing a live event for a multi-faceted DJ with a long career, f genre-spanning musical appeal, and humorous spoken word element.
f e diverse characteristics of the DJ (funny, cool, provocative) led to a lack of f clarity on positioning for the promotion team who struggled to arrive at a coherent f audience strategy.
Ambiguity about which audience segments to focus marketing f and promotions on risked diluting the overall eectiveness of the marketing.
f e business needed to develop a clear audience strategy and direction to ensure f tour protability.
g Context-dependent issues f Lack of clarity invariably leads to low or no budgets f DAVID: g In the creative g industry, there are a lot of permissions needed from g dierent stakeholders to drive a coherent campaign.
When theres no alignment g on approach, then no one wants to spend money.
g In my experience, clarity brings condence, secures permissions, and unlocks g budgets.
Being very clear and having evidence makes everything move forward g smoothly, rapidly, and more eectively.
g I think a lot of companies encounter the same problems as this promoter: a lack g of clarity means the wider organization does not buy into the idea (or value) of g audience research to help marketing be more eective, and consequently, there h is insucient budget.
h In such situations, teams frequently wing it implementing intuition-informed h initiatives.
While not wholly bad, this can miss valuable insights that a more h detailed audience analysis project might reveal.
370 h LLMs misconceptions and reservations h DAVID: h Many people misunderstand LLMs, thinking theyre just next-word h predictors or are incapable of producing something original because they rely h on existing data.
is notion goes against users desire for unique, tailored ideas h and nuanced insights.
Others, meanwhile, believe they grasp the tech but one i bad experience can lead them to dismiss it.
Another fallacy is the notion that i the whole process can be automated with the touch of a button, but theres a ton i of skill required, which is not automatable.
i We tackled these awed assumptions by emphasizing that eective results i require expertise and iteration.
When the project sponsor ran her own prompts i with sub-par results, we had to demonstrate to her, the leadership team, the i sta, and the artist himself the need for deep domain knowledge and the right i prompting approach.
i Knowing how to use ChatGPT and then how to iterate, prune, and rene at i every single step using its p memory is an innately human process.
Youve got to p edit and own the output.
Youre responsible, not ChatGPT.
Approach p DAVID p : e Marketing Director wanted audiences to be at the heart of the work p for this event and asked me to support the company to develop a strategy.
I saw p this as an opportunity to showcase the potential of LLMs like ChatGPT to rapidly p develop insightful audience segmentations.
p When meticulously prompted with the input of expert collaborators and rened p over multiple iterations, ChatGPT can help you understand your audience, q innovate, and set a strategy.
q To fast-track actionable insights, a three-phase process was applied to leverage q generative AI: 371 q Figure 32.
1 Three-phase process to leverage generative AI in q developing marketing strategies (Source: Prompt.
mba) Phase 1: Understanding the persons key dimensions of fame q DAVID q : First, we q used ChatGPT to comprehensively analyze numerous articles q on the artist from mainstream media, music press, and fan sites over his career.
r With several dierent phases in his career and many aspects to his character, r this process yielded proles for audiences of dierent ages and music genres.
By r providing very specic instructions, the LLM extracted and condensed the most r signicant themes explaining the nuances behind the artists evolving public r image and multifaceted fame.
r In this process, we copied the text of the articles into ChatGPT as part of the r prompting, providing it with new context and requesting it to extract the essence r of that context to identify the underlying themes.
is is something ChatGPT is r really, really good at identifying implicit themes that are not explicitly stated r in the text.
Its a huge advantage that researchers can leverage at scale.
It allowed s decades of rich press coverage and commentary to be eciently synthesized into s data points on why dierent fan segments are drawn to this particular persona s and musical output.
s e prompt here is crucial you have to be specic.
Writing Summarize this s article is an absolutely terrible prompt.
So, I would say, Im interested in s marketing a tour by this person.
Im looking to understand the deep underlying s needs of his audiences.
Use this article to come up with a list of as many deep s and underlying needs that drive people to want to go see this artist as possible.
s We learned that in some instances, the more context you paste in, the less the s model pays attention to that context.
Prompting needs a lot of nuance about t what you are looking for, for example, underlying dimensions of their fame t 372 t versus reasons why theyre famous versus dierent types of things theyve done t in their career versus reasons why people might be excited about going to see t them live.
Each is a dierent set of wordings for prompts and provides results t highlighting dierent angles.
t Every stage demands human decision-making, following certain results and t abandoning others.
Its a collaborative process with hours of iteration, discussion, t and debate.
As the researcher, I have reasonable knowledge of this person, of the t marketplace, and of audiences.
But the decision-maker is the marketing director.
u She knows this person and the audience better than me and she knows whats u useful.
So, there was a lot of back and forth with her to say, Hey, I think this list u of themes is pretty good, heres 20, and then heres the 40 that didnt make the u cut.
en we talk them through together to rene them further.
u Figure 32.
2 Improving prompts in a step-by-step manner to u achieve more effective outcomes (Source: Prompt.
mba) u 373 u Figure 32.
3 Ten-point prompting recipe guide (Source: Prompt.
mba) X u DAVID v : rough the v multiple iterations and curation of this analysis, we got to v 15 independent drivers of somebody wanting to go see this show.
But drivers are v not enough; you have to bring the audience to life.
So, for each driver, we asked v what kind of person has this need?
What are their hopes and dreams?
What v lifestyle do they live?
What TV shows do they watch?
What magazines do they v read?
What other music do they listen to?
is is crucial because you are not v marketing to the need; youre marketing to the broader person in the context of v 374 v their life so their related needs are really important to develop segments.
We go w from needs to audiences, which, in turn, give us audience segments, in a further w two or three prompts.
w I queried ChatGPT, You deeply understand audience motivations and behaviors.
w You have high business acumen, complex problem-solving skills, audience w empathy, and creative writing skills.
en I asked it to perform as: u v w An analyst at a top-tier audience strategy consulting rm x y A strategic and business-focused person An ethnographer A cooperative researcher A creative writer y We used several series of prompts to expand and dig deeper, as described above, y on each driver or facet of fame and develop proles outlining the typical lifestyle y attitudes, behaviors, and interests of likely fans who would be drawn by that y specic aspect of the artists oering.
is helped us boil down the original 15 y to a list of 7-8 core targetable audience clusters, which is a manageable number y to debate.
None of these were characterized by age or music genre taste, but y by deep underlying needs, which is a totally dierent way of thinking about y marketing the event.
y Previously, we would go through this laborious process ourselves, reading y extensively and conducting interviews with a wide variety of people in the industry.
It could take weeks to compile a useful list of dimensions for a topic or theme.
In this instance, we did it in hours.
In the end, every one of these segments would be valid candidates to go aer and position the event and marketing around, but you cant do them all.
So, you probably have to pick one, two, or three and then go deep and market to them.
At the end of the day, this takes an awful lot of judgment.
Because theyre all valid ways to describe people, you cant really be wrong about these segments.
e kinds of tests you can therefore apply are, for example, asking, Is this segment 375 useful?
Does it t the creative vision of the person?
Is it actionable?
Ultimately, its about instinct and this is one of the reasons that you cant automate this stu, because I cant articulate all the criteria Im judging it on its a task that lives outside of ChatGPT.
Phase 3: Developing a tailored positioning and strategy DAVID : Finally, we leveraged ChatGPT to develop needs, pain points, and ideas aligned to the values of each group, helping us begin to tailor marketing approaches to the values and preferences of each fan group.
Asking ChatGPT to work out what creative writing, positioning on adverts and marketing, as well as the imagery that would engage and excite each group.
roughout this process, we continuously applied human expertise by iteratively rening the prompts and thoughtfully curating the most viable outputs.
is infusion of real-world business judgment prevented impractical suggestions or those with a narrow focus from passing into the nal strategy recommendations.
It was about combining my expertise, because I know what a good audience segmentation and strategy looks like, and that of the promoter, who knows the artist and their goals.
I couldnt have done it without the promoter, and they couldnt have done it without me and neither of us could have done it without ChatGPT.
To take a more detailed view, this is what the prompt process looks like: Because ChatGPT works best with relatively small specic tasks, I asked, for each of the six segments, Please write three bullet points on how we might reduce their pain points as it relates to a night out like this.
en I asked for three innovations we could do to make the event experience uniquely meet the needs of this audience.
en, for each segment, I asked ChatGPT to think through three positioning strap lines and ways to position the event that might uniquely meet the needs of this segment.
I use a lot of prompts.
is is the kind of thing we would chain and do automatically because were just thinking through stu.
Were not going to use all of it; its more like brainstorming.
376 e nal result is a creative brief with key messages, tone of voice, and creative direction that would engage each segment.
D Results and Impact DAVID : e approach resulted in increased revenue (ticket sales), cost savings, and time to insight to drive the strategy.
e nal cost of our innovative method was less than 5% of the usual expense for an audience strategy project, delivered in 20 hours instead of 5-6 weeks.
is demonstrates the potential of large language models like ChatGPT in signicantly reducing both time and cost in strategic planning, resulting in a more impactful event with a higher return on investment (in ticket sales).
Its very rare for a promoter like this to have a metric they want to move before doing the work.
Here, the key metric was sales.
e challenge is that theres no counterfactual to this specically: how much would you have sold if we didnt do the marketing in this way?
ere was no A/B testing of marketing strategies.
Impacts included: Y ` a e AI-assisted approach providedrich audience insightsin just20 hoursover b a few weeks, comparable to the 30,000+ of traditional qualitative interviews, c surveys, and data analysis.
d e f is automated approach was executed atless than 5% of the usual budget.
g h i e artists fanbase was clearly dened intoeight clusters, which helped align p the promoters team and built condence in the audience(s) to target.
q r s is led to tailored positioning strategies incorporating messaging, venue t design, and event format to resonate with each fan subgroup.
u v w ere was a strong consensus that the three-phase process led to an impactful x and higher ROI event than would have been delivered otherwise.
377 y e promoter moved from a generic, mass marketing approach, relying on gut feel and assumptions, to an AI-enabled, more personalized audience strategy for this event.
Key Learnings Perspective broadening : Beyond augmenting skills and saving time, LLMs are important tools to bring in broader perspectives for business idea generation.
ey can generate a higher volume of ideas, but with a greater variance of quality.
erefore, this necessitates the human expertise to discern the most promising concepts.
Importantly, LLMs dont replace human creativity in the crucial task of combining these ideas and parameters into innovative, high-quality solutions.
LLM prompt optimization : LLMs like ChatGPT are augmenting business processes by speeding up operations, providing valuable insights, and aiding strategic decision-making.
However, ChatGPT requires specic detailed prompts to achieve optimal results.
Furthermore, the process involves multiple steps and iterative renement with expert curation at each stage to ensure high-quality outputs and prevent error propagation.
LLMs democratize data and analytics : LLMs provide smaller businesses access to data and analytics tools that were previously exclusive to larger corporations.
LLMs provide an aordable alternative to traditional market research and audience segmentation, leveling the playing eld and facilitating growth and innovation across all business sizes.
Human-AI collaboration : While automation can produce satisfactory results, excellence requires human decision-making.
e eective use of AI demands human involvement at each stage of results, to optimize quality and prevent error propagation.
is expertise and judgment cannot be automated.
" Industry-savvy decision-makers # : Collaboration with decision-makers who $ have a deep understanding of the industry, customer, or product is crucial.
% Addressing skepticism and knowledge gaps, you can ensure strategies align & with their vision and goals.
' ( ) Continuous learning 0 : Eective use of AI requires both industry knowledge 1 and continuous learning.
Even with guidance and training, there can still be 2 gaps in understanding how to eectively use AI tools, which makes upskilling 3 an ongoing imperative.
379 5 33 6 CASE STUDY 7 8 Software D D evelopment 9 and Customer I I nnovation IN CONVERSATION WITH ZEEV FARBMAN : Co-Founder and CEO of Lightricks, an award-winning app developer that creates easy-to-use apps for photo and video editing.
Lightrickss mission is to bridge the gap between imagination and creation, by building innovative photo and video tools that enable content creators and brands to produce engaging, high-performing content.
I LinkedIn: P zeev-farbman-b5926b37 380 Q Case Study in Summary R S T U Segment: B2C primary V and B2B secondary W X Y Industry: Soware ` a b Geography: Global, headquartered in the Middle East, with oces in the c UK and US d e f Value creation levers: Soware development g h i Time to impact: 6 months aer initial consumer AI release p q r Regulatory s considerations: Low t The Business Challenge With AI driving rapid changes in traditional business models, soware development company Lightricks wanted to respond to new customer demands and future- proof their growth, by looking for more immersive, personalized experiences to drive consumer engagement.
e maturation of LLMs and the development of Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have empowered AI to not only generate high-quality code but also automate complex tasks.
is shi could commodify laboriously developed skills and processes and meet customers changing expectations.
The Response Zeev Farbman returned to his engineering roots to grasp the transformative impact of AI and LLM technology for his company.
is technologys ability to process and transform photos and videos paves the way for automating tasks once solely in the human domain.
Recognizing that it could streamline complex skills built over time, Farbman understood the need to respond and adapt.
381 Farbman shied his business internally and externally, focusing on understanding how customers were integrating AI into their workows and improving the speed and agility of his own business processes.
is case study demonstrates the profound impact generative AI will have on soware development, and tools for creators and brands to enhance their creative process, opening up new opportunities for innovation.
e work was done in three phases: Phase 1: Engage .
is phase involved a deep understanding of AI technologies and their challenges to traditional operating models and internal processes, as well as their impact on customer segments.
Phase 2: Adapt .
is phase involved making necessary adjustments to the operating model, organizing into relevant customer verticals, building new tools based on customer trends, and integrating AI into internal processes.
Phase 3: Innovate .
is phase included exploring new ways to use AI to improve business processes and create new opportunities for growth through iteration and relevant application into customer products and services.
Case Study in Detail Entrepreneur, CEO, and Lightricks co-founde r Zeev received a PhD in Computer Science, writing a paper on diusion maps for edge-aware image editing.
He co-founded Lightricks in Jerusalem, Israel, in 2013 with Nir Pochter, Yaron Inger, Amit Goldstein, and Itai Tsiddon.
e founders noticed that Adobe was not prioritizing developing consumer content creation tools for mobile.
Seeing this as an opportunity, they took on the challenge to be the Adobe of mobile a successful business strategy.
382 Today, the companys HQ can be found on the Hebrew University campus, in addition to oces in Haifa and Beersheba, and global sites in London and Chicago, which, in total, employ approximately 600 people.
Lightricks oers a range of apps to creators of all skill levels, including Facetune, Videoleap, and Photoleap, all designed to make it easier for users to express themselves and tap into the magic of creating.
Its apps have been downloaded more than 680 million times.
( The Business Challenge ZEEV : Historically, Adobe focused on desktop and built 2D tools for professionals, while their competitor Autodesk focused on 3D tools for professionals on desktop.
We saw an opportunity to prioritize developing consumer content creation tools for mobile.
I believe AI is going to have a radical impact on society and how we do things, and that traditional domain boundaries are going to change.
LLMs have advanced to the point where they can generate sophisticated, high-quality code.
is is a shi toward a new computing paradigm where complex human ideas and nuanced natural language can be converted into formats machines can understand.
Such a transformation has the potential to revolutionize the soware development industry and we need to keep pace.
Customer and consumer expectations are shiing fast and there is more demand for immersive and personalized engagement, as seen around the release of a recent fantasy heist action movie.
A global entertainment company came to us to explore a unique new way to market their new fantasy movie while emphasizing user engagement through technology, with a custom AI avatars feature.
383 G Context-dependent issues A new paradigm of computing ZEEV : e complexity of technology, process, and data environments that organizations have invested in over time has resulted in a technical debt that makes it dicult for them to adapt and innovate.
However, AI has the potential to revolutionize the way businesses operate and create new opportunities for growth and innovation.
Traditionally, computer code has been written in a programming language that machines can understand.
Its an approach that needs a high level of technical expertise so its limited because not everyone can do this.
But natural language processing is a real game-changer because it can create high-level, high-quality code thats more accessible to everyone.
Its this new paradigm of computing that has the potential to revolutionize the way we interact with machines.
ZEEV : e biggest disruption from our perspective as a soware developer is that LLMs are already getting to a maturity where they can create high-level, high-quality code.
We are starting to see more and more projects inside our company where most of the code is written by AI, which is leading to a new paradigm of computing.
is is evident in the development of a new breed of language models Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) that can translate high-level human intentions and fuzzy human language into something machines can understand.
ey can combine text with other forms of information, such as videos, audio, and other sensory data, to understand and manipulate visual elements, solve problems, and unlock new applications.
384 is new wave of technology has the potential to make many soware development capabilities into commodities.
For example, MLLMs can automate image and video captioning, speech recognition, and natural language processing, tasks that previously required human intervention to develop interfaces.
If we dont adapt and build on this new technology, a signicant portion of our work could become obsolete.
Approach ZEEV : Its my rm belief that to stay ahead in business, we must continuously engage, adapt, and innovate, leveraging agile methodologies and technology to push boundaries and unlock new opportunities for growth.
is is what weve done at Lightricks.
We implemented a three-phase approach to transform our internal processes and meet new customer demands.
is involved a systematic and structured progression, using AI internally within Lightricks and externally to innovate with customers.
Phase 1: Engage Using AI internally within Lightricks Familiarize yourself with AI ZEEV : e guidance I would give to CEOs and boards is that its crucial to understand these technologies in depth.
Oen, the only reason things are done a certain way is due to inertia, but its important to challenge the status quo.
So, dive in and dont be afraid to ask those hard questions because its the only way to ensure youre making the most of these incredible advancements in AI.
With this in mind, I decided to get back into programming to understand these technologies more intimately.
is had a profound impact on our business, changing how we invest our resources, prioritize projects, and approach our work.
385 Assess the potential impact of AI on your business model ZEEV : AI is so disruptive, especially in soware development, that its crucial to understand its potential impact on your business.
In the realm of online text, databases have become a commodity.
Since Steve Jobs introduced the Macintosh in 1984, companies have invested heavily in building user interfaces.
In fact, what many tech companies have been selling for the last 40 years is essentially layers of user interface on commodity technologies.
Were already seeing that AI can create personalized interfaces and, in the soware world, were moving toward having an AI agent that can build personalized soware.
So, we need to ask, if AI can build user interfaces and these interfaces become a commodity, what exactly are soware companies selling?
is level of disruption requires a close understanding of the incoming wave.
Its essential for CEOs and boards to get close to this incoming wave.
Once you have a good understanding of AI and its potential impact on your business, its time to explore the potential for both customer products/solutions as well as internal processes.
Using AI externally to innovate with customers Understand the impact of AI on your primary customer segments ZEEV : In the consumer segment, people are excited to use the latest tools.
We conducted a survey earlier this year in the US sampling about 1,000 creators to understand their receptiveness to AI tools and businesses in general.
We had the assumption that creators were using AI but were surprised to nd that so many were already using AI in their workows.
386 Key insights include: !
6 84%of current creators are likely to use AI if it saves time or money, while !
7 an even higher percentage,86%, are likely to use it if it positively impacts !
8 the creative process.
A While some creators have embraced AI as a tool for artistic expression 64% !
B of current creators consider it to be a form of art others may still be skeptical !
C or unsure of its potential, so its still evolving.
F As generative AI becomes more accessible, we predict that the creator economy !
G will undergo a widespread boom as creators can use it to scale their creative !
H process !
I and attract more brand deals and partnerships.
P Phase 2: Adapt Using AI internally within Lightricks ZEEV : Just before the generative AI wave hit, we diversied into four dierent business verticals to give our products and customers specialized attention.
ree of these verticals are focused on photo and video editing apps that together serve millions of users.
is split has led us to easily adapt and adjust our oering to include state-of-the-art AI capabilities.
e fourth vertical is more of a B2B focus and is based on a platform called Popular Pays, which we acquired in 2022.
e platform connects creators to brands to engage them for content creation and quick, social-media-driven campaigns.
In our B2B business, were in direct contact with representatives from a number of brands responsible for creating content and marketing materials.
For example, a brand might invest in a commercial marketing campaign only to realize that everyone has moved to TikTok.
So, now they need to adapt their materials for TikTok, which requires vertical videos rather than the short, horizontal format in high-end commercials.
AI can step in here and solve these problems quickly and eciently.
Even product photography, which can be costly and time-consuming 387 to adapt to dierent geographies, can benet from AI solutions.
eres a big incentive for brands to start looking at AI solutions across the board.
Its important to note that brands have dierent concerns from consumers.
ey care about the legal aspects of using these models and where the liability lies, for example, if artists claim that their photos were used for training the models.
However, things have recently changed dramatically as companies like Adobe have decided to take the liability of using these tools on themselves, reducing perceived risk.
Using AI for internal processes ZEEV : Were embracing AI not just in our product oerings but across our internal operations as well, and the benets are becoming clear.
I believe its essential for businesses like ours to adapt; those who dont are at risk of falling behind as technology reshapes roles across development, marketing, and design.
If youre not part of the game, youre likely to be out of it pretty soon.
Were actively rening our approach to coding using LLMs and have developed a bunch of internal tools for dierent departments within the company.
Adapting our processes to integrate these innovations presents its own hurdles, particularly when getting buy-in from our teams, even those who are technically minded, yet our commitment to transparency, especially when showing our new ways of working to clients, helps demystify how weve developed a dierent response to their marketing question.
Gradual adoption ZEEV : Historically, computer scientists have made things more ecient, and now our jobs are online.
Initially, there was excitement from the CTO and others, but this didnt immediately spread throughout the organization.
Early attempts to deliver AI-based features to customers werent all successful, leading to some internal backlash.
is created friction with the teams responsible for implementation.
388 We realized that such a signicant change needs to be done gradually, with the entire team.
So, we invested in ensuring everyone had access to the latest tools and found early adopters to work on challenging and interesting products.
is required eort as the legal team had to develop guidelines on whats acceptable to use for coders, marketing people, and the IT team.
We started working with OpenAI early on and were one of the rst companies they rolled their enterprise features to.
We ensured every employee could use the latest models for language and image generation.
Gradually, we started to see a positive impact.
A small cybersecurity startup I recently spoke with claimed that 95% of their !
rst product was built using LLMs.
is suggests signicant gains in developer !
productivity.
We used to believe there was no silver bullet for soware engineering, !
but now were realizing that we might have found one in AI.
Using AI externally to innovate with customers !
Consumer trends and building new tools for recurring revenues !
ZEEV !
: In the consumer sector, content creation is driven by trends.
What people !
are seeing on social networks oen directs the work.
Weve noticed hobbyist !
communities creating really cool things, and when people see them on Instagram, !
they expect to see something similar in the content creation tools theyre using.
" For example, there was a trend this year that was a huge hit for us.
It allowed " people to reimagine real-world locations as apocalyptic scenarios, inspired by " apocalyptic movies and TV shows.
We created a feature AI Scenes that made " it easy to do this, and it led to a huge surge in downloads.
At the peak of the " trend, we were getting half a million downloads a day and were one of the top " ve apps in Apples App Store.
" But its not just about " playing the trend game.
Over time, were building tools " from these trends, distilling them into useful building blocks that go beyond " gimmicks and have a longer shelf life.
389 "0 Phase 3: Innovate # Using AI internally within Lightricks # A/B testing # ZEEV # : In the world of content # creation, its fascinating how AI has started to play a # signicant role.
e actors you see in ads, and even in the setting or background, # may not be real theyre created by AI.
is allows for an incredible amount of # A/B testing.
# Were constantly measuring how people respond to creatives.
In the marketing $ department, internal tooling that allows more A/B testing and asset creation is $ a huge thing.
Every month, we allocate a certain performance marketing budget $ and task our team with achieving a Return on Ad Spend (ROAS) aer 30 days, $ 60 days, and so on.
$ Using AI externally to innovate with customers $ ZEEV $ : An example of how we applied AI innovation externally was in our $ partnership with a global entertainment company in the promotion and launch $ of their new fantasy heist action movie.
is partnership was much more than $ adding a new feature to one of our apps.
We wanted to transform how blockbuster % movies were marketed and experienced by fans.
% Objective % We created a campaign brief to foster a sense of inclusion in the movies universe % using the generative art technology in Lightrickss Photoleap app so fans % could create and share personalized character avatars in the likeness of one of % the movie characters on social media.
Lightricks already had a strong existing % relationship with the global entertainment company and we aimed to jointly % promote this feature, leveraging our partnership to oer fans a novel, AI-driven % way to engage with the lm.
390 % Technological challenge and creative solution & Designing AI avatars for the movie while retaining the users unique identity & was a particular challenge due to the multiple fantasy-based characters within & the games universe.
We overcame & this with a balanced approach, engineering & design prompts and templates that captured the movies essence while ensuring & players could identify with their characters.
e solution provided fans with an & immersive experience that allowed them to see themselves in the context of the & lms world without losing their personal touch.
& Execution & During the premiere at SXSW, the entertainment company unveiled the Photoleap ' movie tool, engaging fans with an accessible avatar-creation feature via the ' Photoleap app.
Fans could upload photos to cra avatars resembling their ' favorite characters, promoted through visual branding.
Lightricks launched the ' campaign last year, boosting it with a paid social media campaign across multiple ' platforms and international markets to drive app downloads.
Collaborative PR ' eorts between Lightricks and the entertainment company delivered widespread ' media coverage, aligning the campaigns technological innovation with the fans ' passion for the fantasy action ' lm universe.
"y Results and Impact ( Using AI internally within Lightricks ( ZEEV ( : By rethinking ( our core operating model and internal processes and ( making changes to serving key customer segments, weve made improvements ( throughout our business.
( Our education of teams and how they access these new technologies has helped ( bring everyone on the journey together and embed changes.
391 ( Weve increased the speed and agility of our processes, especially internally.
For ( example, our customer experience team now uses AI to respond to standard ) questions or issues, which is about 65% of the emails they receive.
To give you ) some context, we have millions of monthly active users and tens of thousands ) of emails, so being able to reduce the volume to our customer support team by ) 65% really increases the personal attention to the remaining 35%.
) AI innovation has driven signicant marketing performance improvement, ) including internal tooling that allows more A/B testing and asset creation.
) Were also doing more with fewer people and increasing our Return on Ad Spend ) (ROAS) targets as a big chunk of our performance marketing improvement was ) because of AI.
) Impacts included: # # # Increased speed and agility of internal processes, with 65% of customer emails # now answered using AI.
# # # Improved performance marketing and increased Return on Ad Spend # (ROAS) targets.
0 Using AI externally to innovate with customers 0 ZEEV 1 : Because content creation is driven by trends in the consumer sector, weve 1 tracked the trends and built new tools.
ese are useful building blocks that go 1 beyond gimmicks and have a longer shelf life.
1 Our collaboration with the entertainment company was a huge success, 1 demonstrating the powerful synergy between cinema and cutting-edge AI 1 technology.
Not only did it deepen fan engagement but it also demonstrated the 1 vast potential of AI in creating personalized promotional strategies.
e initiative 1 reinforced Lightrickss position as a pioneer in providing large-scale, customized, 1 and immersive experiences.
It showcased our vision and helped cement our 1 industry inuence, and paved the way for future innovative campaigns.
392 2 e campaign achieved substantial engagement, with 350,000-character bundles 2 created and a 25% increase in app installs.
By June 23, the campaign had generated 2 signicant media attention with 13 detailed stories in notable outlets, leading to 2 over 15.
6 billion potential impressions.
At Lightricks we also harnessed social 2 media engagement, reaching 20 million people and incorporating user feedback 2 to iteratively rene the AI and 2 improve the user experience.
2 Impacts included: #( #) #0 Increased consumer engagement with a 25% increase in app installs.
#1 #2 #3 Enhanced brand reputation with 15.
6 billion PR campaign impressions.
#4 Key Learnings #5 #6 #7 Leadership understanding of AI technology #8 : Leadership with an intimate #9 hands-on understanding of AI can crucially inuence resource investment, #@ project prioritization, and work approach.
A proactive approach ensures optimal #A utilization of technology, keeping the business at the forefront of innovation.
#B #C #D Evolving business demarcations #E : AI is eroding traditional boundaries between #F dierent businesses.
Organizations should be prepared to adapt and evolve #G as these boundaries shi.
#H #I #P AI and code generation #Q : LLMs have matured to a point where they can #R generate high-quality code.
e development of Multimodal Large Language #S Models (MLLMs) that can understand and manipulate visual elements like #T photos and videos has the potential to automate tasks that previously required #U human intervention.
AI is a game-changer for soware engineering.
#V #W #X Customer use of AI #Y : In the consumer sector, its important to stay attuned #` to trends and develop tools accordingly.
Trend-based tools or products can #a eventually become useful building blocks with a longer shelf life.
At the #b same time, understand and stay close to how your customers are using AI #c in their workows.
393 #d #e #f AI in internal processes #g : Integrating AI into high-value internal processes can #h have a positive impact on the productivity of developers, marketing people, #i and designers.
Maintain transparency when presenting new ways of working #p to clients to build trust.
#q #r #s Strategies for smooth integration #t : Incorporating AI into business operations #u can be challenging, requiring careful planning, gradual implementation, and #v incentivized adoption.
Ensuring access to the latest tools and identifying early #w adopters for AI projects will help avoid setbacks.
Develop legal guidelines to #x clarify what tools are acceptable for dierent teams to use.
#y # # AI-driven A/B testing # : AI plays a signicant role in content creation, allowing # for extensive A/B testing.
It can create alternative audience personas and # creative assets, enabling marketers to test, and rene messaging for optimal # performance.
Internal tooling in the marketing department further streamlines # the process by facilitating rapid A/B testing and asset creation.
# # # Synergies between diverse expertise # : Multidisciplinary teams tend to # outperform highly specialized teams, while interdisciplinary collaboration # can open new avenues for innovation.
395 # 34 # Where Weve Got To and Whats Next 9 AI is not a recent development, but extracting value from it remains a challenge 9 for many businesses.
e shi toward eciency and improved productivity 9 is a crucial aspect of modern business operations.
is is where AI can play a 9 signicant role.
9 Learning how to leverage data and put AI to work has been the core purpose of @ this book.
@ Despite the wide acknowledgment of AIs benets, many organizations and boards @ still struggle to use AI to generate value.
Learning from leading AI practitioners @ has been key to meeting this challenge.
@ e AI Value Playbook @ does not claim to @ have all the answers, but by sharing learnings on how AI can promote growth, @ improve cost eciency, and mitigate risk, we can all benet.
@ Over the past 10 years and, more recently, with the launch of publicly accessible @ LLMs, we have had clear evidence of what an AI-driven organization can achieve: A making operations more resilient, improving core processes and customer A experience, managing risk, and strengthening employee engagement.
W W HERE W W EVE G G OT T T O AND W W HAT s S N N EXT 396 A Technological progress rarely arrives in a single, disruptive moment, but instead A evolves through seemingly minor innovations over time.
is oen makes A it dicult to foresee its full potential impact.
e full impact of AI is yet to A materialize primarily because large sectors of the economy are at dierent stages A of integrating AI into their business practices.
It will take time.
A Some organizations are mature in their understanding and use of AI, others are A just beginning their journey, and many are at various stages in between.
Certain A industries have higher switching costs and more signicant regulatory hurdles.
B is broad range highlights that a exible framework is essential to integrate B AI into a business, one that can evolve and accommodate dierent levels of B maturity and scale.
B is nal chapter is designed to encapsulate the essence of the entire book into B a playbook in its own right the AI Value Playbook (AIVP).
Drawing on both B my professional experience and the insights from interviews and case studies, I B have developed the AIVP framework.
is framework consolidates the successful B approaches, common themes, and rst principles identied across a diverse B range of industries and business models, revealing underlying commonalities B and learnings.
$0 The AI Value Playbook C is playbook has C been developed to guide organizations on how AI can be C implemented to drive value.
Its not about the right way; its about nding C eective solutions to complex problems and continuously learning.
C e AIVP outlines four key interconnected components that need to be worked C through to successfully implement AI: $7 $8 $9 Strategic Alignment and Target Application $@ : is ensures the AI initiatives $A align $B with the companys strategy.
It prioritizes how AI will be used within the $C organization to measurably add value.
is includes dening the AI use case $D the specic problem its designed to solve and its interaction with other W W HERE W W EVE G G OT T T O AND W W HAT s S N N EXT 397 $E systems to achieve this goal.
It also details the AI systems inputs, outputs, and $F interactions, and measures the resulting benets, which form a business case.
$G $H $I Technical Capability $P : is starts with an internal evaluation of data quality, $Q security, and technical capabilities.
is assessment establishes a baseline and $R benchmarks key aspects of an organizations readiness for AI implementation.
$S It analyzes current resources, tools, practices, architecture, integration points, $T performance, and scalability.
It serves as a foundation for developing a robust $U AI roadmap aligned to the businesss growth strategy and uncovers gaps, $V risks, and opportunities.
$W $X $Y Operating Model $` : e operating model serves as a blueprint for the eective $a delivery of an AI solution.
It denes which resources are required, how they $b are organized and allocated, and the operational procedures that need to $c be followed.
$d $e $f AI Adoption and Managing Change $g : is is the process of deploying and getting $h benets from an AI solution.
Its about eectively integrating the AI solution $i into business operations and culture.
It involves internal training, addressing $p resistance, continuous monitoring, and adjustment of the implementation $q process to ensure the solution is technically procient, accepted, and $r used.
G Figure 34.
1 The four key components of the AIVP G W W HERE W W EVE G G OT T T O AND W W HAT s S N N EXT 398 $u STRATEGIC $v Strategic Alignment and Target Application $w Is the use of AI aligned with your business strategy?
Will it solve a $x problem important to your organization?
G Many businesses H are grappling with the following situation: Weve got lots of H data in a data lake, we want to extract value from it and use AI, but were unsure H how to go about it.
e answer to this starts with strategic alignment, target H application, and measurement.
H Business strategy alignment and leadership play a vital role in successful AI H delivery.
Its essential to have a clearly quantied AI strategy that evolves through H an iterative process and addresses priority business problems.
Alignment is crucial H for realizing value, whether its about making or saving money or mitigating risk.
H is involves understanding how AI can continuously enhance and transform H business operations, products, and services, improve customer experience, I manage risk, and strengthen employee engagement.
I Drawing from my rsthand experience, leadership has an important role to cut I through competing priorities and spearhead AI as a driver of business growth.
I While working with a global infrastructure investment rm, where the talent is I innately analytical and data literate, the CEO was instrumental in moving the AI I program from critical, do later to critical, do now.
He had a clear ambition to I integrate AI into their operations, not only by modernizing the data estate and I adopting new technologies but also by redesigning his business model to make I the best use of these advancements.
His ambition and vision brought everyone I on board and made the dierence.
P Leadership is responsible for setting the direction, dening the strategy, objectives, P metrics, and incentives.
It fosters a culture of innovation and ensures that teams P have the resources they need to execute AI initiatives.
Success oen comes through P a cycle of trials and learnings.
Leaderships responsibilities include investing in P talent development, infrastructure, operating model adjustments and research.
W W HERE W W EVE G G OT T T O AND W W HAT s S N N EXT 399 P Moreover, leaders P must also be able to articulate the value of AI to stakeholders, P manage risks, and ensure the ethical and responsible use of AI.
% Is the application of your AI project targeting the right need to make % an impact?
Q Organizations rarely struggle to put forward a wishlist of problems they want AI Q to solve, but these need to be prioritized against capability and value impact.
To Q create focus, bringing dierent stakeholders, including business users, technical Q teams, and nance colleagues into one room to brainstorm optimal use cases Q is enormously benecial.
is process involves structured problem-solving Q techniques and design methodologies to focus on the issues that really matter Q and where AI can generate value.
Q When determining the value of an AI solution, a key question to ask is: who Q owns it?
While the technology team may build the solution, they cant generate Q value with it.
Technical solutions are oen developed hoping the business will R nd value; however, excluding the business perspective during development R can lead to insucient attention paid to user experience, adoption, and value R measurement.
e true value comes from the stakeholders being fully invested R in making it work by using the solution and realizing its benets.
Ownership R lies best with the business where the use case stems from.
R Occasionally, we can get caught up in the pursuit of pushing the boundaries of R AI capabilities and overlook the importance of clearly dening the problem we R are attempting to solve.
Absorption in the quest for solutions can overshadow R the need for a strategic pause.
It is important for the businesss practitioners to R conduct a root cause analysis and establish whether the problem can be framed S and quantied.
Understanding the organization involves examining the tasks S and the processes the people follow.
Collaborating with individuals who have a S deep understanding of the domain, and closely observing their work, will avoid S preconceptions.
Its about asking the right questions to develop use cases (a specic S application of AI to benet the business), Objective and Key Results (OKRs), and S capability S requirements, including process and change S impact and technology.
W W HERE W W EVE G G OT T T O AND W W HAT s S N N EXT 400 S Its essential that these use cases are easily understood by all stakeholders, that S they provide a clear direction for the AI solutions and a measurable way to track.
T People are more likely to use an AI solution if they see a clear personal benet.
T When dening the use case and OKRs, its crucial to be able to answer: Whats T in it for them?
is answer should allow for iteration over time, enabling T continuous value realization and improvement.
T Once everyone agrees on the problem denition and the opportunity for AI the T use case, target design, and its potential value you can then discuss the technical T capabilities needed to support it and develop an execution plan.
%G %H %I U While many U organizations develop targeted AI use cases, few follow through by U measuring their value and impact.
Its vital to not just develop these applications, U but to also keep an eye on their value through initially developing minimum viable U product (MVPs), which U focus on testing essential functionality and eectiveness.
U is is crucial for buy-in across the business and future scaling.
U AI projects require an agile and outcome-focused approach; its not just about U adding more tech or more people.
e focus shis from a technical pipeline to U delivering tangible business results.
V A good approach is to take a nancial P&L lens to solving a problem by assigning V each team their own line item to answer the challenge.
Adopting a build-measure- V learn cycle is key to keeping this all aligned building the solution, tracking V its impact, and learning as you go for constant improvement.
is loop ensures V everyone is in tune and pursuing the right areas for success without chasing V pipe dreams of perfection in AI models, which can lead to excessive costs and V diminishing returns.
V Demonstrating tangible monthly savings and incremental value will justify V continued business investment.
Success comes from starting small, securing V executive buy-in, and guiding the business W through AI adoption.
is means W W HERE W W EVE G G OT T T O AND W W HAT s S N N EXT 401 W being resource-savvy and starting with MVP models with a prot focus.
is W process requires time and patience.
%s The Individual Plays W Align leadership and strategy: W Articulate a clear business case W by dening and quantifying the problem to W solve and the gap between the current state and the proposed solution.
Ensure W the problem is manageable in scope for resolution.
is will secure buy-in.
W X ensuring leadership understands AI as a risk X and value driver.
Align this strategy with key organizational goals and targets, X ensuring it encompasses the required infrastructure, resources, funding, and X organizational support.
X Ensure purposeful AI deployment X by prioritizing projects that demonstratively X contribute to achieving your organizations strategy and impact key value drivers.
X Maintain focus on business outcomes and the impact of every AI project.
X Align incentives to the appropriate individuals X with incentives for middle Y management aligned to successful AI implementation.
Otherwise, they may Y resist the changes, which frequently cause failures in projects.
Y Y , those in the business who stand to benet most Y from an AI solution.
is simple shi leads to a more ecient use of resources Y and a clear demonstration of value.
Y Maintain a clear vision and focus Y to keep project momentum, even amidst Y competing priorities.
Y Play the long game ` , making necessary investments in engineering, ` infrastructure, operating model changes, and partnerships.
ere can be ` quick wins along the way but the implementation of AI into core processes is ` not an overnight sensation.
W W HERE W W EVE G G OT T T O AND W W HAT s S N N EXT 402 ` Pinpoint value and prioritize: ` Understand how AI disruption ` could impact your industry and existing business ` model.
Analyze how AI could solve operational pain points and align with the ` organizations existing strengths.
Leverage experienced AI practitioners and ` industry specialists to highlight the potential disruption from AI now and on a the horizon.
a Focus on the priority challenges a the organization is facing to pinpoint where a AI can enhance value.
Which functions contain high-potential processes that a could drive near-term savings?
Where does data become the primary asset and a a source of IP?
What are the data risks?
is involves examining peoples tasks a and processes to develop the best target use cases for commercial gain.
a Work with both data and domain experts a for the specic sector to ensure a a clear framing of the commercial business opportunities/use cases for AI and b the likely value impact.
b Formulate and prioritize hypotheses b that are practical and relevant to value b creation.
Establish a backlog of hypotheses depending on urgency, feasibility, b and cost.
b Develop a roadmap for implementation b aligned with the organizations b growth strategy and outline the practical steps for implementing your b highest-priority hypotheses.
b Develop a minimum viable product (MVP): c Ask the right questions c to c extract the most meaningful output, otherwise the c dataset will just be another breakdown of results.
c Focus on a manageable scope c by selecting two to four hypotheses/business c questions to focus the MVP on, depending on the size and number of data sources.
c Build an MVP c to validate priority hypotheses quickly.
is outlines how data will c be used, how it will be sourced and managed, and the potential AI solutions.
is d MVP can be developed within a typical 12-week delivery timeline.
is includes d bottom-up use case preparation, design and UI, build, UAT/QA, and deployment.
W W HERE W W EVE G G OT T T O AND W W HAT s S N N EXT 403 d Plan for scalability d , demonstrating incremental progress and value to stakeholders d to d secure ongoing investments and counter the impatience for impact.
ink d big, start small, scale fast.
d Measure: d Shift to business-outcome-centric solutions d by moving away from a technical e focus to prioritize solutions that deliver clear business benets.
is involves e considering objectives, key results, and methodologies that focus on continuous e value realization and customer benets.
e Adopt a build-measure-learn cycle e in an iterative process to help continuously e improve the solution based on the learnings from each cycle.
e e by taking a P&L approach to solving a problem.
e is helps the team see how their work directly impacts the businesss bottom line.
e Monitor, update, and maintain f the developed solution to ensure the solution f remains f optimized and delivers long-term benets.
&c TECHNICAL &d Technical Capability &e Does your organization have the capability to provide and manage &f the data foundations and services for AI?
f e technology f team leads the essential task of deploying AI by providing shared f services to the data and AI teams in the business.
e technology team can help g the business optimize its operations and focus on revenue-generating areas.
is g starts with a clear evaluation of the current AI maturity, using a structure such g as the following: W W HERE W W EVE G G OT T T O AND W W HAT s S N N EXT 404 g Strategy g PEOPLE g AI DEVELOPMENT g g LIFECYCLE g TECHNOLOGY g h h h aligned to key targets h and includes the h required infrastructure, h resources, funding, and h organizational support.
h h AI skills in the organization h i not siloed.
i Ability to translate i business needs into AI i technical requirements.
i Plan for training and i development of the i i i value, enhance customer i and employee interfaces, p p and productivity p in operations.
p Employees have domain- p p p application of AI in the p target use case.
p Clear technical strategy, p q business strategy, and a q q capabilities required to q deliver the organizations q AI strategy.
W W HERE W W EVE G G OT T T O AND W W HAT s S N N EXT 405 q Delivery q PEOPLE q AI DEVELOPMENT q q LIFECYCLE r TECHNOLOGY r r project scope and selecting r appropriate algorithms.
r Competence in managing r the development pipeline.
r Expertise in data collection, r cleaning, transformation, r and feature engineering.
r Ability to handle large s datasets and ensure s data quality.
s Skills in data engineering, s machine learning, and s s and operations.
s s development strategies, s monitoring, and integration s into existing systems.
t t t and deploying AI models.
t High-value business t processes and t t decision-making are t t t training, hyperparameter u u tuning, and evaluation u u methodologies.
u Ability to evaluate u u model performance u u using relevant metrics and u identify potential issues v v Technology architecture v v and shared services enable v the delivery of v v priority use cases.
v Data lake provisioning.
v Common data model and v data catalog.
w Data access w w management.
w Source code and delivery w w processes are managed, w shared, and checked w w for quality.
w Expertise in relevant x machine learning libraries, x cloud platforms, and x W W HERE W W EVE G G OT T T O AND W W HAT s S N N EXT 406 x Management and Governance x PEOPLE x AI DEVELOPMENT x x LIFECYCLE x TECHNOLOGY x Understanding of y data security and y privacy regulations.
y Understanding of legal and y ethical considerations in y data handling.
y y management principles y and practices and AI y governance strategies.
y Executive sponsorship for data management and AI governance initiatives.
versioning, bias mitigation techniques, and responsible AI practices.
management and data architecture design.
Data governance access requirements.
Implementation of data governance processes to ensure data quality, compliance, and responsible AI practices.
Monitoring of the models performance in production and logging its activity for auditing purposes.
Tracking of explainability, Data management tools, data pipelines, and security measures for handling sensitive data used in AI systems.
mitigation of potential biases in the data and the models output.
Implementation of explainable AI techniques to make the models decision-making process understandable.
Ability to identify and address potential security vulnerabilities in AI systems.
Table 34.
1 AI maturity assessment criteria is assessment needs to be adapted to the scale of an organization to identify opportunities, benchmark progress, and quantify the value of implementing AI.
is includes evaluating data quality and its ethical use.
e risk of not doing W W HERE W W EVE G G OT T T O AND W W HAT s S N N EXT 407 this leaves gaps in understanding the level of data maturity, quality, integrity, and associated risks, and where the organization needs to get to.
Early opportunities for impact Oen, the initial outcome of an assessment identies opportunities for quick wins.
Even in an organization burdened with legacy systems and a suboptimal architecture, an AI solution can work eectively with minimal integration.
For example, an AI-powered recommender solution can be used in a customer service context to predict the next best action for customer care sta with minimal integration into a legacy CRM.
An important aspect of the assessment is to understand user workows and the industry-standard technology that people rely on for critical processes.
With due consideration, the business can integrate industry-standard solutions where appropriate.
e assessment can also reveal in-house gaps in capability, which can be rapidly augmented through forming strategic partnerships with specialist rms.
Peer relationships with other businesses are another valuable source for sharing expertise from both within and outside the specic industry.
ese relationships can help address common challenges, drive innovation, and build on the progress made by others.
While the leadership team is responsible for reducing time to business value, the technology team plays an instrumental role.
ey centrally manage standardized services, including creating and managing data interactions with applications, IoT, and other tools to create business-owned AI solutions.
A common practice is to establish shared services for AI use cases, including data landing, log management, governance rules, compliance, ethics, and security measures.
e technology team ensures the data lake is well managed, curated, and cataloged, as well as enabling data merging and cleaning.
is allows the W W HERE W W EVE G G OT T T O AND W W HAT s S N N EXT 408 data and AI team within the organization to create standardized AI solutions using congurable, reusable services without extensive coding.
A low-code or no-code approach is oen used to create AI solutions more eciently, employing a user-friendly drag-and-drop interface and pre-built templates.
is system automatically applies data quality and master data service rules.
is approach assumes the infrastructure is cloud-based with governance built in, so solutions can scale up or down as needed, making value realization agile and ecient.
us, compliance happens by design rather than enforcement.
Its a complex shi that takes time to implement.
Creating standardized and congurable environments with automated tools and pipelines is also pivotal for AI iterative development.
ey allow the data and AI team to work in their preferred manner with a governed framework for tracking and measuring results.
is environment can be easily automated using tools like YAML and DevOps pipelines, eliminating the need for manual intervention.
It not only reduces costs but also establishes governance around the process, enabling better control and understanding of activities.
Testing throughout the entire lifecycle To ensure successful and optimized AI implementation, prioritize rigorous testing throughout the entire lifecycle.
is includes integrating human expertise (HITL) for quality assurance, especially during training data creation.
A dedicated DataOps team streamlines testing and ensures high-quality data throughout the AI development process.
To catch issues early and optimize performance before public release, leverage internal super users through a rigorous internal testing process (dogfooding).
Ethics and reputational risk Ethical AI and reputational risk considerations are an emerging eld, encompassing a broad range of practices and strategies.
e integration of ethics into the AI solution lifecycle is a critical aspect of responsible AI development.
ere are a number of evolving frameworks, and a key thought leader is Professor Luciano W W HERE W W EVE G G OT T T O AND W W HAT s S N N EXT 409 Floridi, Oxford Internet Institutes (OII) Professor of Philosophy and Ethics of Information, and Director of the Digital Ethics Lab at the University of Oxford.
In his recent book e Ethics of Articial Intelligence: Principles, Challenges, and Opportunities , he identies ve core principles for ethical AI that should be fundamental considerations for business leaders: )" 1.
)# )$ : AI should be designed and developed to benet people by )% solving meaningful problems and improving eciency.
)' )( : AI should not harm people.
is requires a thorough )) risk and impact assessment and involves building secure AI systems to )0 prevent malicious use.
)2 Autonomy )3 : AI should respect human autonomy by augmenting human )4 decision-making and aligning with privacy legislation.
)6 Justice )7 : AI should be fair and just and not perpetuate bias or discrimination.
)9 Explicability )@ : AI should be intelligible and accountable.
is implies )A establishing mechanisms for accountability, such as audit trails.
e European AI Act, formally known as the Articial Intelligence Act, is a signicant piece of legislation currently being nalized by the European Union (EU).
It aims to be the worlds rst comprehensive legal framework for regulating articial intelligence (AI).
is act will address three key areas: )F )G )H Trustworthy AI )I : Ensure AI respects rights, safety, and ethics (prevent )P bias, harm).
)Q )R )S Risk-based regulation )T : Stricter rules for high-risk AI (facial recognition, )U medical diagnosis).
)V )W )X Innovation and competitiveness )Y : Promote responsible AI development for )` a strong European AI market.
W W HERE W W EVE G G OT T T O AND W W HAT s S N N EXT 410 Horizon scanning for emerging technologies To inject progressive thinking and keep pace with the speed of AI innovation, establishing a design authority is paramount.
is forward-thinking team scans the horizon for emerging trends and technologies, ensuring competitive advantage.
Furthermore, the organization needs to understand the value of building modularity into core capabilities.
is future-proofs the organization by allowing components to be updated as the business needs evolve across dierent timeframes.
)p The Individual Plays Assess current capability and quick wins: )r )s )t Establish a baseline of data quality, security, and technical capabilities )u .
)v is involves evaluating architecture, integration points, performance, and )w scalability.
is helps benchmark progress and identify opportunities for )x potential optimization and growth.
)y ) ) Plan risk mitigation and targeted investments ) based on a thorough ) understanding of the foundational tech components: infrastructure, AI ) tools and algorithms, and security measures.
) ) ) ) with a drill down on what needs to change in ) the next 6-9 months and set the tech capability journey in the right direction.
) Include both oensive and defensive investments.
) ) ) Establish an ecosystem of AI specialist partners ) to augment in-house ) capabilities and develop relationships with peers to collaborate on solutions ) to common problems and drive industry innovation.
Establish a robust data foundation: ) ) 0 Build data architecture capabilities 0 as the rst step in setting up the foundation 0 for AI solution development.
0 0 0 Establish data management and governance 0 practices to ensure high- 0 quality, controlled data inputs for AI development.
Integrating data and AI W W HERE W W EVE G G OT T T O AND W W HAT s S N N EXT 411 0 management allows the organization to concentrate on deriving value from 0 their data in a controlled, compliant manner.
0 0 0 Implement data security and access controls 0 for sensitive data, restricting 0 access to authorized personnel only.
0 0 0 Ensure the infrastructure is cloud-based 0 , so solutions can scale up or down 0 as needed, enhancing agility and eciency with governance built in to ensure 0!
reliability 0" and compliance.
is approach optimizes value realization and 0# drives business growth.
0$ 0% 0& Enable shared services 0' for AI solution development.
Build capabilities into 0( the data architecture.
Put in place mechanisms to source, cleanse, and control 0) key data inputs and ensure data and AI management are integrated.
00 01 02 Implement architectural standardization 03 to enhance eciency through 04 automation and congurable, reusable capabilities.
05 06 07 Make regular updates and integrations 08 to enhance the models capabilities, 09 keeping it relevant and valuable.
Integrate the AI solution with existing systems 0@ in the organization to provide a user-friendly experience for information 0A access through familiar interfaces.
Consider solution design integrity: 0C 0D 0E 0F as well as their ingrained technology preferences, 0G and build these into your solution, where appropriate, to increase engagement.
0H 0I 0P Ensure that AI technology decisions are both commercially viable and 0Q customer centric 0R .
Conduct preliminary customer research to guide technology 0S decisions, and then incorporate a continuous customer-centric approach with 0T structured customer feedback systems.
0U 0V 0W Prioritize integrating AI into high-value processes 0X , while maintaining 0Y awareness of innovations that could impact other aspects of the value chain 0` or decision-making, and swily adapt.
W W HERE W W EVE G G OT T T O AND W W HAT s S N N EXT 412 0a 0b 0c Preserve technical modularity 0d in engineering and architecting.
Carefully 0e consider the buy versus build approach for each component, as the trend 0f of AI service development will commoditize solutions.
0g 0h 0i Leverage domain specialist engineers 0p to work in collaboration with domain 0q process designers, for successful proprietary model building.
0r 0s 0t Avoid over-engineering a model 0u , balancing mathematical rigor with practical 0v human logic to solve the problem at hand.
Understand the pros and cons 0w of each method or algorithm.
Plan your architecture, including data ow, 0x before starting to code.
0y 0 0 Take an iterative and user/customer-led approach 0 to the development of 0 AI solutions.
Integrating feedback and input is an ongoing process.
Over 0 time, this 0 approach allows for ongoing enhancements and improvements.
0 0 0 Establish a design authority 0 that is responsible for scanning the horizon for 0 emerging technologies in order to maintain a competitive advantage.
Evaluate the opportunities and impact of LLMs: LLMs are emerging as a powerful tool, with signicant potential to reshape various aspects of business operations for many industries.
Some organizations are leveraging LLMs to solve long-standing problems, and other organizations are being le behind.
e following are ve key areas to explore the opportunities and impacts: 0 0 1 Human-Machine Interface (HMI) 1 , where 1 LLMs serve as the front-end for 1 interactions, oering a dynamic and prompt-led UI.
is may lead to user 1 prompting replacing static reporting, dashboarding, and xed user interactions.
1 1 1 Programming 1 , where the rapid development of LLMs are impacting 1 programming by aiding in learning to code, assisting in soware engineer 1 tasks, generating code, analyzing assisting in soware engineering, analyzing 1 large data sources, and enabling multilingual programming.
W W HERE W W EVE G G OT T T O AND W W HAT s S N N EXT 413 1 1 1 Organization knowledge distribution and automation 1 , where LLMs are 1 being used to collate enterprise knowledge, enhance employee productivity, 1 and automate and standardize processes.
is involves rening proprietary 1 organization knowledge, enabling personalized and dynamic processes, and 1 hyper-automation by no-code agents.
1" Data platforms 1# , where LLMs ability to process and analyze large data sources 1$ could potentially expand the scope of data lakes.
LLMs can handle diverse data 1% formats and integrate information from various sources.
LLMs can uncover 1& hidden patterns and insights within the data, enabling organizations to make 1' more informed decisions.
1( 1) 10 Broadening perspectives 11 , where LLMs can be trained on an organizations 12 data and IP, so they can become a valuable tool to support the creative process.
13 LLMs can 14 generate a vast quantity of ideas, although the quality can vary.
15 erefore, human creativity remains crucial in the task of combining and 16 transforming these ideas into innovative, high-quality solutions.
Prioritize testing throughout the lifecycle: 18 19 1@ Integrate human oversight, Human-in-the-Loop (HITL) 1A , throughout the 1B development cycle.
Human expertise plays a crucial role in quality assurance, 1C particularly when building training data for models.
is ensures accuracy 1D and robustness in your AI systems.
1E 1F 1G Implement a rigorous internal testing process, dogfooding 1H , for early 1I quality checks.
Leverage internal super users (knowledgeable employees) 1P or select customers in a private preview to identify bugs and usability issues 1Q before public release.
1R 1S 1T Establish DataOps 1U for streamlined testing and quality assurance throughout 1V the AI lifecycle.
is includes implementing robust testing procedures to 1W guarantee data quality and system performance.
W W HERE W W EVE G G OT T T O AND W W HAT s S N N EXT 414 Optimize performance post-launch: 1Y 1` 1a Gather and analyze customer feedback 1b for continuous improvement through 1c a combination of methods; select in-depth interviews with key customers, 1d surveys, and analysis of customer support interactions.
1e 1f 1g Use a metrics-driven approach 1h to track model performance, 1i customer engagement, Key Performance Indicators (KPIs), and overall 1p solution ecacy.
Design trustworthy AI systems: 1r 1s 1t 1u as considerations and legislation vary 1v across geographies 1w encompassing a broad range of practices and strategies.
1x 1y 1 Ensure AI solutions consider core principles for ethical AI 1 , encompassing 1 regulatory 1 compliance, system validity, safety, security, accountability, 1 transparency, explainability, privacy, and fairness.
1 IMPLEMENTATION 1 Operating Model 1 How does your operating model enable the integration of AI solutions?
1 Does it bring the right teams and skills together?
Oen, when I work with business leaders, they underestimate the complexity of integrating AI and assume that hiring a data scientist will be a silver bullet that transforms their organization and future-proofs it for the next three years.
However, driving value through AI requires diverse expertise.
Multidisciplinary, cross-functional teams with soware developers, data scientists, and data engineers are more likely to outperform highly specialized teams.
ey can handle a variety of use cases and build dierent types of AI solutions.
W W HERE W W EVE G G OT T T O AND W W HAT s S N N EXT 415 Capability needs will vary, but the composition of a high-level team includes: 1 1 2 Business architects 2 : Individuals who lead the overall approach and bridge 2 the dierent domains of business and technology to dene the strategy, 2 governance, use cases, and alignment toward value realization.
2 2 2 Data engineers 2 : Specialists in moving, storing, and managing data within 2 cloud environments.
Responsible for delivering automated consistent 2 datasets to AI systems.
2 2 2 Software engineers 2 : Coders who grasp soware development principles.
2 2 2 Data scientists 2 : Analytical data experts who are closely tied to the use case.
2 ey focus on creating models to meet specic business needs and are, ideally, 2 employed by the business unit they serve.
2" User experience professionals 2# : Includes both designers and UI experts 2$ who ensure the end product is functional and graphically appealing.
2% 2& 2' MLOps 2( : Machine learning operations engineers who understand ML algorithms 2) and soware deployment.
ey collaborate between data scientists and 20 operations to manage the lifecycle of models.
21 22 23 DevOps 24 : Engineers who understand the soware lifecycle, deployment, and 25 maintenance of AI-enhanced soware solutions.
# Of these ve # capabilities, three are worth further focus.
Firstly, the importance # of data engineering teams cannot be overstated.
ey form the backbone of any # data-driven operation, ensuring that the data is available at the right time and $ in the right format.
ese are critical to deploying numerous models.
$ Other crucial skill sets that are sometimes $ overlooked are business architects $ and User Experience (UX) professionals.
W W HERE W W EVE G G OT T T O AND W W HAT s S N N EXT 416 $ Business architects play a pivotal role in bridging the oen signicant gap $ between the technical and business teams.
e technical team, while procient $ in determining what needs to be built, may sometimes fall short in collaborating $ eectively with the business side to secure investment and ensure the adoption $ of the solutions.
Conversely, business leaders may not always know the right $ questions to ask the technical team regarding the possibilities and means to achieve % them.
Business architects resolve this disconnect, integrating the technological % possibilities with the business objectives.
% UX professionals ensure the end product is functional, user-friendly, and % engaging.
Incorporating UX skills into your team can ease adoption and change % management.
UX professionals work at the beginning of the product design cycle % and revisit their work with each improvement to the product.
Investing in UX at % the outset oen leads to more successful outcomes.
Additionally, incorporating % design thinking into the team structure fosters a closer relationship between IT % and business, resulting in products that are more useful to the business.
% Supplementary infrastructure skills may not be required if cloud adoption is & mature within the business, as many of the tasks traditionally performed by & these roles can be automated.
However, the type of AI solutions being built will & inuence the skill sets required within a team.
For example, building complex & AI systems may necessitate architectural skills to design robust and scalable & solutions.
In addition, governance capabilities are critical to ensure compliance & with data regulations and ethical standards.
Furthermore, the rapid evolution & of large language model technology requires a blend of technical expertise and & conceptual understanding in deep learning, NLP, prompt & engineering, and & architectural patterns.
2p Sourcing talent ' Recruiting the right talent is challenging but investing time to get clarity on ' role requirements and a commitment to diversity can build teams that drive ' eciency and value.
W W HERE W W EVE G G OT T T O AND W W HAT s S N N EXT 417 ' In sourcing technical talent, its important to consider domain expertise as well as ' the availability and cost of resources.
Generally, resources for popular technologies ' like Python or Power BI are more abundant and therefore cheaper, while resources ' for niche products or smaller vendors may be scarce and more expensive.
' Understanding these factors and individual motivations can help you recruit ' and retain the right talent.
Recognizing that not all individuals are the same ( some may be starters, others may be nishers or maintainers helps form ( a well-rounded team, while balancing skills across project phases is essential.
( Data scientists have very dierent backgrounds, from Oxbridge PhDs to data ( engineers with experience in using standard libraries.
e task requested of the ( data scientist needs to align with their individual skill set and experience.
If a ( high-yer is given routine tasks, they are likely to feel a lack of learning and ( growth, stagnate, and leave.
Equally, giving a complex and ambiguous task to ( a less experienced data scientist may leave them frustrated and unmotivated.
( Talent shortage is a commonly cited problem.
However, there are large pools of ( passionate and motivated professionals in all forms of technology.
Seasoned tech ) professionals I speak with are eager to learn, How can I stay up-to-date with AI ) innovation?
e real challenge is in hiring, training, and retention.
For example, ) theres no value in asking for 10 years of experience in a technology or tool that ) hasnt been on the market that long.
e real questions are, do employers really ) understand what is involved in the work?
How to nd and develop these skills?
) How to upskill the existing workforce?
) Traditional methods, based on CVs from familiar talent pools, are insucient due ) to skill shortages and competitive rates of compensation.
Its important to seek ) motivated technical developers to join the team, focusing on nding passionate ) self-starters.
Using practical assessments like hands-on building and reviewing 0 models can help gauge immediate technical skills, while asking for feature ideas 0 helps identify those who 0 are really vested in the development of your organization.
0 To nurture and retain talent, pair junior hires with senior team members to help 0 them up-skill into professional developers.
Implement structured processes like 0 design documents and retrospectives to promote continuous learning.
W W HERE W W EVE G G OT T T O AND W W HAT s S N N EXT 418 0 Academia is a popular recruitment channel, oering a diverse range of talent to 0 various industries.
However, one challenge that oen arises is the inconsistency 0 in the use of tools and techniques.
Academia exposes students to multiple open- 0 source tools and methodologies, each with its own features and applications.
While 1 this process broadens their skill set, it can also lead to a lack of uniformity when 1 they transition into the workforce.
A potential solution is to create contained 1 environments for data scientists to work with a variety of tools and techniques, while 1 also promoting the development of common libraries and reusable components 1 for a more consistent approach to problem-solving and the development of 1 AI solutions across the workforce.
Its a win-win situation that enhances both 1 individual growth and collective productivity.
3 Organizing talent 1 Many organizations begin with a distributed model for AI skills, which oers 1 speed, exibility, and the ability to tailor services and solutions.
However, this 2 approach can lead to several drawbacks, including varying maturity levels, 2 redundant eorts and investments, missed opportunities for the cross-fertilization 2 of practices, and higher overall costs.
2 At the other extreme, a fully centralized model oers economies of scale, common 2 governance and risk management, and shared resources but can be slow to 2 respond to specic business needs.
2 e proposed hub-and-spoke model provides a more ecient and adaptable 2 approach, aligning well with evolving business models.
It leverages the benets 2 of central oversight, governance, and risk management while enabling the 2 consolidation of investments and promoting a degree of autonomy and agility 3 within the business.
is model features a lean Center of Excellence (COE) with 3 expertise in data science, data engineering, operations, governance, and data 3 leadership.
e COE sets standards for solution development, ensures repeatability, 3 and promotes advanced capabilities.
Hands-on AI teams, oen including data 3 scientists and analysts, are integrated into the business, to ensure agility and 3 alignment with specic needs.
W W HERE W W EVE G G OT T T O AND W W HAT s S N N EXT 419 36 Board-level AI expertise 3 Eectively integrating 3 AI necessitates expertise at all levels of an organization, 3 including the board.
While some board members may possess this expertise, others 4 may need to develop it.
Building this expertise could come from recruitment, 4 training, and engagement with external advisors.
e value this expertise can 4 bring includes strategic guidance on data management and AI investments, 4 insights into technology choices, and implications of emerging innovations.
It can 4 help an organization stay ahead of the curve and make informed decisions, thus 4 accelerating its path to becoming a modern, AI-driven enterprise.
In addition, 4 its crucial for boards to consider the ethical implications of AI, such as data 4 security and privacy, algorithmic bias, and the impact on jobs.
3H The Individual Plays 4 Establish a team with diverse skills: 3P 3Q 3R Prioritize domain expertise 3S as a key dierentiator.
3T 3U 3V Deploy multidisciplinary teams 3W as these tend to outperform highly 3X specialized teams.
3Y 3` 3a Consider a hub-and-spoke operating model 3b with a lean Center of Excellence 3c (COE) containing 3d AI specialists including data scientists, engineers, operations, 3e governance, and analysts.
e COE provides expertise and support, while 3f embedding AI talent within business units promotes ownership and trust 3g and ensures responsibility for delivering value.
3h 3i 3p Embed AI technical skills 3q including data scientists, engineers, and analysts 3r into business units to foster ownership and trust and ensure responsibility 3s for delivering value.
3t 3u 3v Hire specialist engineers with domain and tech expertise 3w to work with 3x domain process designers, for successful proprietary model building.
W W HERE W W EVE G G OT T T O AND W W HAT s S N N EXT 420 3y 3 3 Ensure engineering talent is prioritized 3 to meet the growing demand for 3 engineers skilled in integrating complex data systems.
Given the rarity of 3 full stack data 3 scientists, borrowing engineering talent from other teams can 3 deliver the right blend.
3 3 3 Hire adept bridge people (business architects) who 3 can understand and 3 communicate across dierent domains, to facilitate cooperation and mutual 3 understanding among various teams.
3 3 3 Integrate UX expertise 3 to drive adoption and add value to AI projects.
3 3 3 Prepare for a hybrid workforce 4 where AI augments workows.
Success follows 4 when leaders embrace an operating model that leverages the strengths of both 4 humans and machines, rooted in agility, exibility, and continuous learning.
@ Prioritize diverse sourcing strategies and practical assessments: 4 4 4 Diversify hiring strategies 4 to consider candidates from various backgrounds 4 and educational institutions.
Traditional methods are insucient due to skill 4 shortages and competitive rates of compensation.
4 4 4 Seek out motivated technical developers 4 and focus on nding passionate 4 self-starters.
4 4 4 Emphasize practical assessments 4 such as hands-on model building or 4 reviews to assess immediate technical skills.
is approach lls skill gaps but 4 also promotes diversity and innovation.
4" 4# Nurture and retain talent 4$ by pairing junior hires with senior team members 4% to help them up-skill into professional developers.
Additionally, implement 4& structured processes like design documents, code reviews, and retrospectives 4' to promote continuous learning.
W W HERE W W EVE G G OT T T O AND W W HAT s S N N EXT 421 B Build board-level expertise: 4) 40 41 Ensure AI expertise within your board 42 through recruitment, training, 43 or engaging external advisors.
An AI-conversant board can impact the 44 organizations strategy, operations, and competitive landscape, as well as 45 considering the 46 ethical implications of AI.
47 ADOPTION 48 AI Adoption and Managing Change 49 What strategies and processes does your organization have in place 4@ to manage the transition toward AI adoption?
Are your employees 4A equipped and ready?
D In a recent D meeting with a senior healthcare leader, I was asked to discuss a failure D in an AI project.
e example that came immediately to mind was a failure in D adoption and change management in a company where it was assumed everyone D was onboard with the objective to become an AI-led organization and committed D to the work needed to get there.
However, the reality proved otherwise.
is D failure in adoption and change management is a common issue, echoed repeatedly D throughout this book and by other practitioners.
Successful AI implementation E has both a technical aspect and a human element.
e involvement of people E within the organization as a linchpin of successful AI adoption is repeatedly E evidenced in our interviews.
E A E Harvard Business Review E article by Randy Bean ( E packt.
link/hbr E ) revealed the E struggle of many Fortune 1000 companies.
Bean highlighted that the barrier to E becoming data-driven is not just legacy tech but embedded cultures that are resistant F to new ways of doing things.
Interviews and case studies in this book support F this notion, revealing a stronger resistance in longer-established organizations.
F To overcome this challenge, Bean suggests a solution lies in engaging the people F who will work with and be aected by AI in every step of the process.
W W HERE W W EVE G G OT T T O AND W W HAT s S N N EXT 422 F Focusing on the people and processes oen yields quicker and more successful F results.
Conversely, projects that lead with technology tend to be slower and have F a lower success rate.
Driving adoption and ownership of the solution or model F within the organization is crucial its not a case of build it and hope theyll use F it.
Users need to have a vested interest in the creation of these solutions because F having skin in the game helps them realize its value.
G e successful application of AI requires clear executive directives in a top-down G approach and a comprehensive change management program.
Active participation G from every level of the organization in a bottom-up approach is also essential.
G Understanding how to implement these changes in the details of daily work is G also needed.
Questions such as Why is this important to my job?
, What do G I need to do dierently?
, and Can I trust it?
should be addressed.
Its crucial G to ensure a team understands the benets of the new tools or solutions, how to G use them, and the improvements they can bring to their work.
Engaging with G the people who will ask these questions is critical, making them active agents of G change rather than passive recipients.
H To overcome H resistance, frame the project as an experiment rather than a xed H end goal and understand the limitations of your AI solutions.
Respect the fact H that the learning process is continuous and accept it includes failures that lead H to incremental successes.
H e business must own the solution, with a clear and concise use case that allows H for incremental improvements and measurable progress.
If successful, theres a H virtuous cycle as the business starts saving money, stakeholders become satised, H and they begin to use more AI solutions and capabilities.
H Adoption and change begin with early initiatives aimed at achieving quick wins I in areas where the value of the AI solution can be immediately demonstrated.
I Once these initial successes are achieved, the changes can be scaled throughout I the rest of the organization.
Success oen starts with enhancing eciencies I in operational areas like nance, HR, and customer service.
Learnings are I subsequently extended to market products and services.
is approach ensures I a systematic and eective adoption of change.
Success in one area oen sparks I change in others.
W W HERE W W EVE G G OT T T O AND W W HAT s S N N EXT 423 4 The Individual Plays I Secure early wins and drive user adoption: 4 5 5 Start in functional areas 5 such as nance, HR operations, or customer service, 5 focusing on cost savings and eciency gains to provide extra funds to invest 5 in AI project changes and hiring new people.
5 5 5 Involve users from the start 5 to drive adoption and ownership within the 5 business domain, making sure theres a shared understanding of the benets 5 and a vested interest in its success.
5 5 5 Frame AI projects as iterative experiments 5 to secure buy-in.
Ensure initial 5 results align with key metrics and impact business goals.
Understand the 5 limitations of the data/tools and respect that the learning process is a continual 5 one, with failures oen leading to incremental successes.
Q 5 5 5!
Harness storytelling and alignment 5" to create compelling narratives, with 5# the customer in 5$ the role of the hero.
Align data projects with the companys 5% north star metric and identify leading indicators for desired outcomes.
5& 5' 5( Create an engaging environment for communication 5) that captures 50 attention, encourages discussion, and responds to concerns.
Address the 51 last stage of the adoption of an AI solution rst, for a clearer development 52 and deployment approach.
53 54 55 Build trust 56 and guide the organization with patience, humility, and strategic 57 quick wins.
Sharing AI solutions in development with stakeholders the 58 80/20 rule is important to gain buy-in and accountability.
Launch with a 59 partial product to allow for improvements as interest grows.
5@ 5A 5B Invest in continual learning and upskilling 5C to prepare for the AI future.
David 5D Shrier, Professor of Practice, AI & Innovation at Imperial College Business 5E School, goes beyond technical skills and proposes ve key principles to cultivate 5F greater cognitive exibility in your organization, including consistent practice, 5G reective thinking, gradual progress, peer learning, and creative exploration.
W W HERE W W EVE G G OT T T O AND W W HAT s S N N EXT 424 5H In closing T is book has explored the current AI landscape, driven by a strong interest in U the potential of AI to propel sustained productivity growth across industries.
We U opened with the thesis that sustained productivity growth is, in part, contingent U on the eective integration and board adoption of AI solutions across a range U of sectors.
U Tech leaders such as Amazon, Google, Netix, Meta, Microso, and OpenAI have U been investing in AI for over a decade, and their products have become integral U to our daily lives.
However, AI hasnt yet been put to work by wider industries U and translated into ecient growth.
U We are still in the early stages of implementing AI in business operations.
Large U enterprises with established partnerships with the tech leaders, gaining access to V cutting-edge AI tools and expertise, have a clear advantage.
For some businesses, V particularly newer companies built on cloud-based technology, AI adoption V comes naturally.
However, for others, creating value and gaining a competitive V edge through AI might be more challenging.
Technology and investment alone V arent enough to drive V transformation.
We are likely to see a signicant impact V over the next 5 to 10 years.
erefore, the crucial question remains: how can V organizations best integrate AI to achieve signicant productivity gains?
V AI is a rapidly evolving domain.
Its transformative potential in business, the need for V its ethical application, and the innovative leadership required all present signicant W challenges for organizations.
ese challenges are particularly pronounced when W deciding how best to invest in AI technologies.
Yet, as weve seen throughout W the interviews, technology innovation and monetary investment alone are not W sucient to drive transformation.
Integrating AI requires a long-term perspective.
W It takes sustained eort and ongoing iterations.
Failures are inevitable, yet they W can pave the way for incremental successes and continuous improvement.
W W HERE W W EVE G G OT T T O AND W W HAT s S N N EXT 425 W While nancial results might not immediately reect a lack of technology W modernization and AI integration, the consequences are likely to become more W apparent over time as organizations struggle to scale, keep pace with the market, W and adapt to changing customer behaviors.
erefore, investing in technology X can be evaluated as a forward premium, a payment into the organizations future X valuation.
Newly emerging helpful agents are poised to become a leading driver X of AI adoption.
GPT-4 presents exciting possibilities for the growth of virtual X agents with more natural interactions due to advanced reasoning and response X capabilities, and improved task handling through better accuracy and custom X code generation.
X If you came to this book uncertain or hesitant about how to put AI to work in X your organization, I hope your doubts have been dispelled.
Informed by my X experiences and those of AI leaders and CEOs, you now possess a distilled set X of core principles to guide you: the AI Value Playbook.
I trust that the insights Y revealed will enable your organization to target and prioritize where AI can Y create the most value, making sure you have the right technology, talent, and Y culture in place with responsible AI Y governance.
As your organization evolves, Y the details may change but the core principles will remain consistent and help Y inspire your organization to map a route forward.
INTRODUCTION INTRODUCTION OVERVIEW OF AI CONCEPTS AND TECHNOLOGY STACK OVERVIEW OF AI CONCEPTS AND TECHNOLOGY STACK LLMS AND RAG ENABLE HYPER-PERSONALIZED EDUCATION FOR HEALTHCARE TECHNICIANS LLMS AND RAG ENABLE HYPER-PERSONALIZED EDUCATION FOR HEALTHCARE TECHNICIANS AI PERSONALIZATION INCREASES ENGAGEMENT IN NASCENT TECH COMMUNITIES AI PERSONALIZATION INCREASES ENGAGEMENT IN NASCENT TECH COMMUNITIES AI-POWERED VIRTUAL AGENT AUGMENTS SERVICE EFFICIENCY AI-POWERED VIRTUAL AGENT AUGMENTS SERVICE EFFICIENCY GENERATIVE AI CREATES A PARADIGM SHIFT IN INNOVATION PROCESSES GENERATIVE AI CREATES A PARADIGM SHIFT IN INNOVATION PROCESSES UNLOCKING PROFIT POTENTIAL LEVERAGING ENTERPRISE DATA FOR CUSTOMER PROFITABILITY UNLOCKING PROFIT POTENTIAL LEVERAGING ENTERPRISE DATA FOR CUSTOMER PROFITABILITY ENHANCING MARKETING STRATEGIES THROUGH THE POWER OF LLMS ENHANCING MARKETING STRATEGIES THROUGH THE POWER OF LLMS MULTIMODAL LLMS REDEFINE SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT AND CUSTOMER INNOVATION MULTIMODAL LLMS REDEFINE SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT AND CUSTOMER INNOVATION THE AI VALUE PLAYBOOK HOW TO MAKE AI WORK IN THE REAL WORLD LISA WEAVER-LAMBERT 239 23 Joe Romata Global Head of Customer Experience at a Multinational Energy Company No matter how advanced the technology solutions are, their value is lost if they are not understood or used.
e primary focus should always be on the perspective of the end user.
Understanding their needs and interests allows us to engage in meaningful discussions about value, rather than simply pushing our solutions out.
e key question to keep in mind is: Whats in it for them?
is approach ensures that our eorts are targeted and eective.
LinkedIn: joeromata CONTENTS xii Financial Times .
221 Kshira Saagar , .
229 Joe Romata , Energy Company .
239 Tomasz Ullman , at Ford Pro !
" 247 # Oz Krakowski $ , % & .
' 257 ( Case Study ) : 0 1 Healthcare Technicians 2 .
3 267 4 Case Study 5 : 6 AI Personalization Increases Engagement in Nascent Tech 7 Communities 8 .
9 285 @ Case Study A : B C .
D 301 E Case Study F : G H Processes I .
P 313 Q Case Study R : S T U .
V 331 W Case Study X : Y Minimizing Customer Churn with AI ` .
a 343 b Case Study c : d Enhancing Marketing Strategies Through the Power of LLMs e .
f 365 g Case Study h : i p Customer Innovation q .
r 379 s t .
u 395 p About the Author Lisa Weaver-Lambert has been leveraging data to solve complex commercial challenges for over two decades through her roles at Microso, Accenture, and in capital and public markets.
In addition, she has held executive line management positions and served at board level.
Her work in regions including Europe, the US, APAC, and Africa has brought her a global perspective.
Lisas early career in nancial services, working on acquisition, retention, and fraud detection programs, provided a valuable foundation in data-driven decision making.
is experience solidied her understanding of data quality, governance, and its commercial potential.
She witnessed rsthand the power of large datasets and how working with data could solve real-world business problems.
Since then, she has worked with some of the worlds best-known brands towards success, earning her recognition as a leading woman in technology in the EMEA investment eld.
Her extensive experience in strategy and business transformation has led her to collaborate with organizations of dierent sizes and maturity levels to accelerate performance.
Recognizing the transformative potential of AI, Lisas mission is to equip non-technical leaders with the knowledge and condence to leverage AI for their organizations.
Lisa recently founded Oxford AI Studio.
is initiative aims at bridging industry with researchers and knowledge institutes to tackle real-world business challenges and drive the development and application of responsible AI innovation.
Lisa earned her degrees from the University of Lancaster and ESCP Business School in Paris, strengthening her qualications through executive programs at MIT Sloan School of Management and UC Berkeley School of Information.
LinkedIn: lisa-weaver-lambert SARVARTH MI s S RA 112 y LISA : Can you give a brief overview of the services you provide?
SARVARTH : ContractPodAi oers a suite of features including Leah, a generative AI-powered legal assistant, and an intuitive Contract Lifecycle Management (CLM) platform for end-to-end contract management.
It also provides robust analytics to optimize operations, a legal intake solution for request organization, and translation capabilities for over 60 languages.
e company operates on a Soware-as-a-Service (SaaS) model, oering continuous updates and support to its subscribers.
LISA : Can you describe your companys AI-led growth and business model distinction?
SARVARTH : As experienced UK commercial lawyers, this is where we started.
Initially, we thought our market would be SMEs (subject-matter experts) or mid-cap businesses, as we assumed larger organizations would already have contract management systems in place.
However, to our surprise, when we got the product to market, we started gaining traction with very large organizations like Bosch Siemens.
Its the usual entrepreneurial journey you think you know your market audience, but you end up somewhere else.
e pain points were quite similar across the board there was no single source of truth for contracts, the process was broken, and it wasnt done well.
Innovative GCs who were more tech-savvy than their predecessors found this frustrating and were eager for change.
We began attracting these large companies with similar pain points, and thus, the product-market t started veering into the late mid-market to enterprise space.
Our rst customers were eectively large businesses, which was quite accidental.
Fast forward to 2019, we established a presence in the US, specically New York.
Over the next 12 months, we saw similar acceptance of the product-market t.
Weve taken a fairly unique journey in the enterprise B2B soware space.
is business hadnt taken any institutional money and was fairly bootstrapped.
It had a reasonably good ARR (Annual Recurring Revenue) great retention SARVARTH MI s S RA 113 numbers and returning customers.
is is quite dierent from most of our peers who probably spent $20 million building a Minimum Viable Product (MVP).
Our companys growth was initially surprising to analysts due to our tangible revenue base with minimal funding.
Despite the lack of a CTO and being founded by two lawyers, we managed to grow our product platform.
We then partnered with global venture capital and private equity fund, Insight Partners to transition from a bootstrap business to a scale-up, focusing on growth with a scientic approach.
We started building an operating model, considering sales, demand generation, enablement, and building a marketing organization from scratch.
From late 2019 to 2021, we maintained a signicant growth rate and market traction.
en, in September 2021, we secured a substantial funding round ofover $100 millionfromSoBank.
is signicant investment was strategically aimed at shaping the companys trajectory over the next ve years and how en-US we would devise a strategy from both a product and go-to-market motion to lead the legal technology market in our areas of strength.
is funding raise allowed us to continue growing and innovating on the product side so we could serve our customer base with truly cutting-edge technology.
Our focus has been on enterprise customers, positioning ourselves as a legal lead contract lifecycle management player.
We empower legal operators and counsel as decision-makers in buying enterprise technology that benets them.
Weve been able to maintain a good balance sheet.
We have always been committed to growth thats underpinned by scientic principles, and this has consistently been our core focus.
Weve always wanted to make sure we become a little bit more ecient, and thats whats helped us along the way.
Weve always thought about sales, demand generation, enablement, and building a marketing organization from the ground up.
2 The AI Value Playbook Copyright 2024 Packt Publishing All rights reserved.
No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in critical articles or reviews.
Every eort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy of the information presented.
However, the information contained in this book is sold without warranty, either express or implied.
Neither the author, nor Packt Publishing or its dealers and distributors, will be held liable for any damages caused or alleged to have been caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals.
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
Group Product Manager : Niranjan Naikwadi Publishing Product Manager : Nitin Nainani Book Project Manager : Shambhavi Mishra Senior Editor : David Sugarman Copy Editor : Sas Editing Indexer : Manju Arasan Production Designer : Vijay Kamble Senior DevRel Marketing Coordinator : Vinishka Kalra First published: August 2024 Production reference: 4310125 Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Grosvenor House 11 St Pauls Square Birmingham B3 1RB, UK ISBN 978-1-83546-175-4 www.
packtpub.
com Acknowledgements is book, like the discussions it seeks to facilitate, is the culmination of countless conversations and collaborations.
I am deeply grateful to all the interviewees, and their teams, whose insights, stories, and lessons are the essence, of this work.
ank you for your time and generosity of spirit.
I am deeply grateful to the following colleagues and friends who have enriched this book in invaluable ways: Giuseppe Saltini brought his twenty-ve years of experience in the data and information architecture space.
Giuseppes insightful feedback and edits not only enhanced the manuscripts accuracy but, I trust, will also make it more relevant to readers.
David Goodchild lent his creative expertise to the books visual identity.
From the !
captivating cover design to the clear internal layout and informative diagrams, !
Davids contribution signicantly improved the overall presentation.
Kate Willis for her editorial contributions to the interview dras.
And Lara !
Lambert for her meticulous proof-reading.
Insight Partners for their expertise in identifying high-growth generative !
AI companies.
e Packt team, whose keen eyes ensure the books clarity and professionalism.
